ONE

Where Does Morality Come From?

I’m going to tell you a brief story. Pause after you read it and
decide whether the people in the story did anything morally wrong.
A family’s dog was killed by a car in front of their house.
They had heard that dog meat was delicious, so they cut
up the dog’s body and cooked it and ate it for dinner.
Nobody saw them do this.
If you are like most of the well-educated people in my studies,
you felt an initial ash of disgust, but you hesitated before saying
the family had done anything morally wrong. After all, the dog was
dead already, so they didn’t hurt it, right? And it was their dog, so
they had a right to do what they wanted with the carcass, no? If I
pushed you to make a judgment, odds are you’d give me a nuanced
answer, something like “Well, I think it’s disgusting, and I think
they should have just buried the dog, but I wouldn’t say it was
morally wrong.”
OK, here’s a more challenging story:
A man goes to the supermarket once a week and buys a
chicken. But before cooking the chicken, he has sexual
intercourse with it. Then he cooks it and eats it.
Once again, no harm, nobody else knows, and, like the dog-eating
family, it involves a kind of recycling that is—as some of my
research subjects pointed out—an e cient use of natural resources.
But now the disgust is so much stronger, and the action just seems
so … degrading. Does that make it wrong? If you’re an educated

and politically liberal Westerner, you’ll probably give another
nuanced answer, one that acknowledges the man’s right to do what
he wants, as long as he doesn’t hurt anyone.
But if you are not a liberal or libertarian Westerner, you probably
think it’s wrong—morally wrong—for someone to have sex with a
chicken carcass and then eat it. For you, as for most people on the
planet, morality is broad. Some actions are wrong even though they
don’t hurt anyone. Understanding the simple fact that morality
di ers around the world, and even within societies, is the rst step
toward understanding your righteous mind. The next step is to
understand where these many moralities came from in the rst
place.
THE ORIGIN OF MORALITY (TAKE 1)
I studied philosophy in college, hoping to gure out the meaning of
life. After watching too many Woody Allen movies, I had the
mistaken impression that philosophy would be of some help.1 But I
had taken some psychology courses too, and I loved them, so I
chose to continue. In 1987 I was admitted to the graduate program
in psychology at the University of Pennsylvania. I had a vague plan
to conduct experiments on the psychology of humor. I thought it
might be fun to do research that let me hang out in comedy clubs.
A week after arriving in Philadelphia, I sat down to talk with
Jonathan Baron, a professor who studies how people think and
make decisions. With my (minimal) background in philosophy, we
had a good discussion about ethics. Baron asked me point-blank: “Is
moral thinking any di erent from other kinds of thinking?” I said
that thinking about moral issues (such as whether abortion is
wrong) seemed di erent from thinking about other kinds of
questions (such as where to go to dinner tonight), because of the
much greater need to provide reasons justifying your moral
judgments to other people. Baron responded enthusiastically, and
we talked about some ways one might compare moral thinking to
other kinds of thinking in the lab. The next day, on the basis of little

more than a feeling of encouragement, I asked him to be my
advisor and I set o to study moral psychology.
In 1987, moral psychology was a part of developmental
psychology. Researchers focused on questions such as how children
develop in their thinking about rules, especially rules of fairness.
The big question behind this research was: How do children come to
know right from wrong? Where does morality come from?
There are two obvious answers to this question: nature or
nurture. If you pick nature, then you’re a nativist. You believe that
moral knowledge is native in our minds. It comes preloaded,
perhaps in our God-inscribed hearts (as the Bible says), or in our
evolved moral emotions (as Darwin argued).2
But if you believe that moral knowledge comes from nurture,
then you are an empiricist.3 You believe that children are more or
less blank slates at birth (as John Locke said).4 If morality varies
around the world and across the centuries, then how could it be
innate? Whatever morals we have as adults must have been learned
during childhood from our own experience, which includes adults
telling us what’s right and wrong. (Empirical means “from
observation or experience.”)
But this is a false choice, and in 1987 moral psychology was
mostly focused on a third answer: rationalism, which says that kids
gure out morality for themselves. Jean Piaget, the greatest
developmental psychologist of all time, began his career as a
zoologist studying mollusks and insects in his native Switzerland.
He was fascinated by the stages that animals went through as they
transformed themselves from, say, caterpillars to butter ies. Later,
when his attention turned to children, he brought with him this
interest in stages of development. Piaget wanted to know how the
extraordinary sophistication of adult thinking (a cognitive butter y)
emerges from the limited abilities of young children (lowly
caterpillars).
Piaget focused on the kinds of errors kids make. For example,
he’d put water into two identical drinking glasses and ask kids to
tell him if the glasses held the same amount of water. (Yes.) Then
he’d pour the contents of one of the glasses into a tall skinny glass

and ask the child to compare the new glass to the one that had not
been touched. Kids younger than six or seven usually say that the
tall skinny glass now holds more water, because the level is higher.
They don’t understand that the total volume of water is conserved
when it moves from glass to glass. He also found that it’s pointless
for adults to explain the conservation of volume to kids. The kids
won’t get it until they reach an age (and cognitive stage) when their
minds are ready for it. And when they are ready, they’ll gure it
out for themselves just by playing with cups of water.
In other words, the understanding of the conservation of volume
wasn’t innate, and it wasn’t learned from adults. Kids gure it out for
themselves, but only when their minds are ready and they are given
the right kinds of experiences.
Piaget applied this cognitive-developmental approach to the study
of children’s moral thinking as well.5 He got down on his hands and
knees to play marbles with children, and sometimes he deliberately
broke rules and played dumb. The children then responded to his
mistakes, and in so doing, they revealed their growing ability to
respect rules, change rules, take turns, and resolve disputes. This
growing knowledge came in orderly stages, as children’s cognitive
abilities matured.
Piaget argued that children’s understanding of morality is like
their understanding of those water glasses: we can’t say that it is
innate, and we can’t say that kids learn it directly from adults.6 It is,
rather, self-constructed as kids play with other kids. Taking turns in a
game is like pouring water back and forth between glasses. No
matter how often you do it with three-year-olds, they’re just not
ready to get the concept of fairness,7 any more than they can
understand the conservation of volume. But once they’ve reached
the age of ve or six, then playing games, having arguments, and
working things out together will help them learn about fairness far
more e ectively than any sermon from adults.
This is the essence of psychological rationalism: We grow into our
rationality as caterpillars grow into butter ies. If the caterpillar eats
enough leaves, it will (eventually) grow wings. And if the child gets
enough experiences of turn taking, sharing, and playground justice,

it will (eventually) become a moral creature, able to use its rational
capacities to solve ever harder problems. Rationality is our nature,
and good moral reasoning is the end point of development.
Rationalism has a long and complex history in philosophy. In this
book I’ll use the word rationalist to describe anyone who believes
that reasoning is the most important and reliable way to obtain
moral knowledge.8
Piaget’s insights were extended by Lawrence Kohlberg, who
revolutionized the study of morality in the 1960s with two key
innovations.9 First, he developed a way to quantify Piaget’s
observation that children’s moral reasoning changed over time. He
created a set of moral dilemmas that he presented to children of
various ages, and he recorded and coded their responses. For
example, should a man named Heinz break into a drugstore to steal
a drug that would save his dying wife? Should a girl named Louise
reveal to her mother that her younger sister had lied to the mother?
It didn’t much matter whether the child said yes or no; what
mattered were the reasons children gave when they tried to explain
their answers.
Kohlberg found a six-stage progression in children’s reasoning
about the social world, and this progression matched up well with
the stages Piaget had found in children’s reasoning about the
physical world. Young children judged right and wrong by very
super cial features, such as whether a person was punished for an
action. (If an adult punished the act, then the act must have been
wrong.) Kohlberg called the rst two stages the “pre-conventional”
level of moral judgment, and they correspond to the Piagetian stage
at which kids judge the physical world by super cial features (if a
glass is taller, then it has more water in it).
But during elementary school, most children move on to the two
“conventional” stages, becoming adept at understanding and even
manipulating rules and social conventions. This is the age of petty
legalism that most of us who grew up with siblings remember well
(“I’m not hitting you. I’m using your hand to hit you. Stop hitting
yourself!”). Kids at this stage generally care a lot about conformity,
and they have great respect for authority—in word, if not always in

deed. They rarely question the legitimacy of authority, even as they
learn to maneuver within and around the constraints that adults
impose on them.
After puberty, right when Piaget said that children become
capable of abstract thought, Kohlberg found that some children
begin to think for themselves about the nature of authority, the
meaning of justice, and the reasons behind rules and laws. In the
two “post-conventional” stages, adolescents still value honesty and
respect rules and laws, but now they sometimes justify dishonesty
or law-breaking in pursuit of still higher goods, particularly justice.
Kohlberg painted an inspiring rationalist image of children as
“moral philosophers” trying to work out coherent ethical systems
for themselves.10 In the post-conventional stages, they nally get
good at it. Kohlberg’s dilemmas were a tool for measuring these
dramatic advances in moral reasoning.
THE LIBERAL CONSENSUS
Mark Twain once said that “to a man with a hammer, everything
looks like a nail.” Once Kohlberg developed his moral dilemmas and
his scoring techniques, the psychological community had a new
hammer, and a thousand graduate students used it to pound out
dissertations on moral reasoning. But there’s a deeper reason so
many young psychologists began to study morality from a
rationalist perspective, and this was Kohlberg’s second great
innovation: he used his research to build a scienti c justi cation for
a secular liberal moral order.
Kohlberg’s most in uential nding was that the most morally
advanced kids (according to his scoring technique) were those who
had frequent opportunities for role taking—for putting themselves
into another person’s shoes and looking at a problem from that
person’s perspective. Egalitarian relationships (such as with peers)
invite role taking, but hierarchical relationships (such as with
teachers and parents) do not. It’s really hard for a child to see things
from the teacher’s point of view, because the child has never been a

teacher. Piaget and Kohlberg both thought that parents and other
authorities were obstacles to moral development. If you want your
kids to learn about the physical world, let them play with cups and
water; don’t lecture them about the conservation of volume. And if
you want your kids to learn about the social world, let them play
with other kids and resolve disputes; don’t lecture them about the
Ten Commandments. And, for heaven’s sake, don’t force them to
obey God or their teachers or you. That will only freeze them at the
conventional level.
Kohlberg’s timing was perfect. Just as the rst wave of baby
boomers was entering graduate school, he transformed moral
psychology into a boomer-friendly ode to justice, and he gave them
a tool to measure children’s progress toward the liberal ideal. For
the next twenty- ve years, from the 1970s through the 1990s,
moral psychologists mostly just interviewed young people about
moral dilemmas and analyzed their justi cations.11 Most of this
work was not politically motivated—it was careful and honest
scienti c research. But by using a framework that prede ned
morality as justice while denigrating authority, hierarchy, and
tradition, it was inevitable that the research would support
worldviews that were secular, questioning, and egalitarian.
AN EASIER TEST
If you force kids to explain complex notions, such as how to balance
competing concerns about rights and justice, you’re guaranteed to
nd age trends because kids get so much more articulate with each
passing year. But if you are searching for the rst appearance of a
moral concept, then you’d better nd a technique that doesn’t
require much verbal skill. Kohlberg’s former student Elliot Turiel
developed such a technique. His innovation was to tell children
short stories about other kids who break rules and then give them a
series of simple yes-or-no probe questions. For example, you tell a
story about a child who goes to school wearing regular clothes,
even though his school requires students to wear a uniform. You

start by getting an overall judgment: “Is that OK, what the boy
did?” Most kids say no. You ask if there’s a rule about what to
wear. (“Yes.”) Then you probe to nd out what kind of rule it is:
“What if the teacher said it was OK for the boy to wear his regular
clothes, then would it be OK?” and “What if this happened in
another school, where they don’t have any rules about uniforms,
then would it be OK?”
Turiel discovered that children as young as ve usually say that
the boy was wrong to break the rule, but that it would be OK if the
teacher gave permission or if it happened in another school where
there was no such rule. Children recognize that rules about clothing,
food, and many other aspects of life are social conventions, which are
arbitrary and changeable to some extent.12
But if you ask kids about actions that hurt other people, such as a
girl who pushes a boy o a swing because she wants to use it, you
get a very di erent set of responses. Nearly all kids say that the girl
was wrong and that she’d be wrong even if the teacher said it was
OK, and even if this happened in another school where there were
no rules about pushing kids o swings. Children recognize that rules
that prevent harm are moral rules, which Turiel de ned as rules
related to “justice, rights, and welfare pertaining to how people
ought to relate to each other.”13
In other words, young children don’t treat all rules the same, as
Piaget and Kohlberg had supposed. Kids can’t talk like moral
philosophers, but they are busy sorting social information in a
sophisticated way. They seem to grasp early on that rules that
prevent harm are special, important, unalterable, and universal. And
this realization, Turiel said, was the foundation of all moral
development. Children construct their moral understanding on the
bedrock of the absolute moral truth that harm is wrong. Speci c
rules may vary across cultures, but in all of the cultures Turiel
examined, children still made a distinction between moral rules and
conventional rules.14
Turiel’s account of moral development di ered in many ways
from Kohlberg’s, but the political implications were similar:
morality is about treating individuals well. It’s about harm and

fairness (not loyalty, respect, duty, piety, patriotism, or tradition).
Hierarchy and authority are generally bad things (so it’s best to let
kids gure things out for themselves). Schools and families should
therefore embody progressive principles of equality and autonomy
(not authoritarian principles that enable elders to train and
constrain children).
MEANWHILE, IN THE REST OF THE WORLD …
Kohlberg and Turiel had pretty much de ned the eld of moral
psychology by the time I sat in Jon Baron’s o ce and decided to
study morality.15 The eld I entered was vibrant and growing, yet
something about it felt wrong to me. It wasn’t the politics—I was
very liberal back then, twenty-four years old and full of indignation
at Ronald Reagan and conservative groups such as the righteously
named Moral Majority. No, the problem was that the things I was
reading were so … dry. I had grown up with two sisters, close in
age to me. We fought every day, using every dirty rhetorical trick
we could think of. Morality was such a passionate a air in my
family, yet the articles I was reading were all about reasoning and
cognitive structures and domains of knowledge. It just seemed too
cerebral. There was hardly any mention of emotion.
As a rst-year graduate student, I didn’t have the con dence to
trust my instincts, so I forced myself to continue reading. But then,
in my second year, I took a course on cultural psychology and was
captivated. The course was taught by a brilliant anthropologist,
Alan Fiske, who had spent many years in West Africa studying the
psychological foundations of social relationships.16 Fiske asked us
all to read several ethnographies (book-length reports of an
anthropologist’s eldwork), each of which focused on a di erent
topic, such as kinship, sexuality, or music. But no matter the topic,
morality turned out to be a central theme.
I read a book on witchcraft among the Azande of Sudan.17 It turns
out that witchcraft beliefs arise in surprisingly similar forms in
many parts of the world, which suggests either that there really are

witches or (more likely) that there’s something about human minds
that often generates this cultural institution. The Azande believed
that witches were just as likely to be men as women, and the fear of
being called a witch made the Azande careful not to make their
neighbors angry or envious. That was my rst hint that groups
create supernatural beings not to explain the universe but to order
their societies.18
I read a book about the Ilongot, a tribe in the Philippines whose
young men gained honor by cutting o people’s heads.19 Some of
these beheadings were revenge killings, which o ered Western
readers a motive they could understand. But many of these murders
were committed against strangers who were not involved in any
kind of feud with the killer. The author explained these most
puzzling killings as ways that small groups of men channeled
resentments and frictions within the group into a groupstrengthening “hunting party,” capped o by a long night of
communal celebratory singing. This was my rst hint that morality
often involves tension within the group linked to competition
between di erent groups.
These ethnographies were fascinating, often beautifully written,
and intuitively graspable despite the strangeness of their content.
Reading each book was like spending a week in a new country:
confusing at rst, but gradually you tune up, nding yourself better
able to guess what’s going to happen next. And as with all foreign
travel, you learn as much about where you’re from as where you’re
visiting. I began to see the United States and Western Europe as
extraordinary historical exceptions—new societies that had found a
way to strip down and thin out the thick, all-encompassing moral
orders that the anthropologists wrote about.
Nowhere was this thinning more apparent than in our lack of
rules about what the anthropologists call “purity” and “pollution.”
Contrast us with the Hua of New Guinea, who have developed
elaborate networks of food taboos that govern what men and
women may eat. In order for their boys to become men, they have
to avoid foods that in any way resemble vaginas, including anything
that is red, wet, slimy, comes from a hole, or has hair. It sounds at

rst like arbitrary superstition mixed with the predictable sexism of
a patriarchal society. Turiel would call these rules social
conventions, because the Hua don’t believe that men in other tribes
have to follow these rules. But the Hua certainly seemed to think of
their food rules as moral rules. They talked about them constantly,
judged each other by their food habits, and governed their lives,
duties, and relationships by what the anthropologist Anna Meigs
called “a religion of the body.”20
But it’s not just hunter-gatherers in rain forests who believe that
bodily practices can be moral practices. When I read the Hebrew
Bible, I was shocked to discover how much of the book—one of the
sources of Western morality—was taken up with rules about food,
menstruation, sex, skin, and the handling of corpses. Some of these
rules were clear attempts to avoid disease, such as the long sections
of Leviticus on leprosy. But many of the rules seemed to follow a
more emotional logic about avoiding disgust. For example, the Bible
prohibits Jews from eating or even touching “the swarming things
that swarm upon the earth” (and just think how much more
disgusting a swarm of mice is than a single mouse).21 Other rules
seemed to follow a conceptual logic involving keeping categories
pure or not mixing things together (such as clothing made from two
di erent bers).22
So what’s going on here? If Turiel was right that morality is
really about harm, then why do most non-Western cultures moralize
so many practices that seem to have nothing to do with harm? Why
do many Christians and Jews believe that “cleanliness is next to
godliness”?23 And why do so many Westerners, even secular ones,
continue to see choices about food and sex as being heavily loaded
with moral signi cance? Liberals sometimes say that religious
conservatives are sexual prudes for whom anything other than
missionary-position intercourse within marriage is a sin. But
conservatives can just as well make fun of liberal struggles to
choose a balanced breakfast—balanced among moral concerns about
free-range eggs, fair-trade co ee, naturalness, and a variety of
toxins, some of which (such as genetically modi ed corn and
soybeans) pose a greater threat spiritually than biologically. Even if

Turiel was right that children lock onto harmfulness as a method for
identifying immoral actions, I couldn’t see how kids in the West—
let alone among the Azande, the Ilongot, and the Hua—could have
come to all this purity and pollution stu on their own. There must
be more to moral development than kids constructing rules as they
take the perspectives of other people and feel their pain. There must
be something beyond rationalism.
THE GREAT DEBATE
When anthropologists wrote about morality, it was as though they
spoke a di erent language from the psychologists I had been
reading. The Rosetta stone that helped me translate between the
two elds was a paper that had just been published by Fiske’s
former advisor, Richard Shweder, at the University of Chicago.24
Shweder is a psychological anthropologist who had lived and
worked in Orissa, a state on the east coast of India. He had found
large di erences in how Oriyans (residents of Orissa) and
Americans thought about personality and individuality, and these
di erences led to corresponding di erences in how they thought
about morality. Shweder quoted the anthropologist Cli ord Geertz
on how unusual Westerners are in thinking about people as discrete
individuals:
The Western conception of the person as a bounded,
unique, more or less integrated motivational and
cognitive universe, a dynamic center of awareness,
emotion, judgment, and action organized into a
distinctive whole and set contrastively both against other
such wholes and against its social and natural
background, is, however incorrigible it may seem to us,
a rather peculiar idea within the context of the world’s
cultures.25

Shweder o ered a simple idea to explain why the self di ers so
much across cultures: all societies must resolve a small set of
questions about how to order society, the most important being
how to balance the needs of individuals and groups. There seem to
be just two primary ways of answering this question. Most societies
have chosen the sociocentric answer, placing the needs of groups and
institutions rst, and subordinating the needs of individuals. In
contrast, the individualistic answer places individuals at the center
and makes society a servant of the individual.26 The sociocentric
answer dominated most of the ancient world, but the individualistic
answer became a powerful rival during the Enlightenment. The
individualistic answer largely vanquished the sociocentric approach
in the twentieth century as individual rights expanded rapidly,
consumer culture spread, and the Western world reacted with
horror to the evils perpetrated by the ultrasociocentric fascist and
communist empires. (European nations with strong social safety
nets are not sociocentric on this de nition. They just do a very good
job of protecting individuals from the vicissitudes of life.)
Shweder thought that the theories of Kohlberg and Turiel were
produced by and for people from individualistic cultures. He
doubted that those theories would apply in Orissa, where morality
was sociocentric, selves were interdependent, and no bright line
separated moral rules (preventing harm) from social conventions
(regulating behaviors not linked directly to harm). To test his ideas,
he and two collaborators came up with thirty-nine very short stories
in which someone does something that would violate a rule either
in the United States or in Orissa. The researchers then interviewed
180 children (ranging in age from ve to thirteen) and 60 adults
who lived in Hyde Park (the neighborhood surrounding the
University of Chicago) about these stories. They also interviewed a
matched sample of Brahmin children and adults in the town of
Bhubaneswar (an ancient pilgrimage site in Orissa),27 and 120
people from low (“untouchable”) castes. Altogether it was an
enormous undertaking—six hundred long interviews in two very
di erent cities.

The interview used Turiel’s method, more or less, but the
scenarios covered many more behaviors than Turiel had ever asked
about. As you can see in the top third of gure 1.1, people in some
of the stories obviously hurt other people or treated them unfairly,
and subjects (the people being interviewed) in both countries
condemned these actions by saying that they were wrong,
unalterably wrong, and universally wrong. But the Indians would
not condemn other cases that seemed (to Americans) just as clearly
to involve harm and unfairness (see middle third).
Most of the thirty-nine stories portrayed no harm or unfairness, at
least none that could have been obvious to a ve-year-old child, and
nearly all Americans said that these actions were permissible (see
the bottom third of gure 1.1). If Indians said that these actions
were wrong, then Turiel would predict that they were condemning
the actions merely as violations of social conventions. Yet most of
the Indian subjects—even the ve-year-old children—said that these
actions were wrong, universally wrong, and unalterably wrong.
Indian practices related to food, sex, clothing, and gender relations
were almost always judged to be moral issues, not social
conventions, and there were few di erences between the adults and
children within each city. In other words, Shweder found almost no
trace of social conventional thinking in the sociocentric culture of
Orissa, where, as he put it, “the social order is a moral order.”
Morality was much broader and thicker in Orissa; almost any
practice could be loaded up with moral force. And if that was true,
then Turiel’s theory became less plausible. Children were not
guring out morality for themselves, based on the bedrock certainty
that harm is bad.

Actions that Indians and Americans agreed were wrong:
• While walking, a man saw a dog sleeping on the road. He
walked up to it and kicked it.

• A father said to his son, “If you do well on the exam, I will
buy you a pen.” The son did well on the exam, but the father
did not give him anything.
Actions that Americans said were wrong but Indians said were
acceptable:
• A young married woman went alone to see a movie without
informing her husband. When she returned home her
husband said, “If you do it again, I will beat you black and
blue.” She did it again; he beat her black and blue. (Judge
the husband.)
• A man had a married son and a married daughter. After his
death his son claimed most of the property. His daughter got
little. (Judge the son.)
Actions that Indians said were wrong but Americans said were
acceptable:
• In a family, a twenty- ve-year-old son addresses his father by
his rst name.

• A woman cooked rice and wanted to eat with her husband
and his elder brother. Then she ate with them. (Judge the
woman.)
• A widow in your community eats
week.

sh two or three times a

• After defecation a woman did not change her clothes before
cooking.

FIGURE

1.1. Some of the thirty-nine stories used in Shweder, Mahapatra,
and Miller 1987.

Even in Chicago, Shweder found relatively little evidence of
social-conventional thinking. There were plenty of stories that
contained no obvious harm or injustice, such as a widow eating sh,
and Americans predictably said that those cases were ne. But more
important, they didn’t see these behaviors as social conventions that
could be changed by popular consent. They believed that widows
should be able to eat whatever they darn well please, and if there’s
some other country where people try to limit widows’ freedoms,
well, they’re wrong to do so. Even in the United States the social
order is a moral order, but it’s an individualistic order built up
around the protection of individuals and their freedom. The
distinction between morals and mere conventions is not a tool that
children everywhere use to self-construct their moral knowledge.
Rather, the distinction turns out to be a cultural artifact, a necessary
by-product of the individualistic answer to the question of how
individuals and groups relate. When you put individuals rst, before
society, then any rule or social practice that limits personal freedom
can be questioned. If it doesn’t protect somebody from harm, then it
can’t be morally justi ed. It’s just a social convention.
Shweder’s study was a major attack on the whole rationalist
approach, and Turiel didn’t take it lying down. He wrote a long
rebuttal essay pointing out that many of Shweder’s thirty-nine
stories were trick questions: they had very di erent meanings in
India and America.28 For example, Hindus in Orissa believe that sh
is a “hot” food that will stimulate a person’s sexual appetite. If a
widow eats hot foods, she is more likely to have sex with someone,
which would o end the spirit of her dead husband and prevent her
from reincarnating at a higher level. Turiel argued that once you
take into account Indian “informational assumptions” about the way
the world works, you see that most of Shweder’s thirty-nine stories
really were moral violations, harming victims in ways that
Americans could not see. So Shweder’s study didn’t contradict

Turiel’s claims; it might even support them, if we could nd out for
sure whether Shweder’s Indian subjects saw harm in the stories.
DISGUST AND DISRESPECT
When I read the Shweder and Turiel essays, I had two strong
reactions. The rst was an intellectual agreement with Turiel’s
defense. Shweder had used “trick” questions not to be devious but
to demonstrate that rules about food, clothing, ways of addressing
people, and other seemingly conventional matters could all get
woven into a thick moral web. Nonetheless, I agreed with Turiel
that Shweder’s study was missing an important experimental
control: he didn’t ask his subjects about harm. If Shweder wanted to
show that morality extended beyond harm in Orissa, he had to show
that people were willing to morally condemn actions that they
themselves stated were harmless.
My second reaction was a gut feeling that Shweder was
ultimately right. His explanation of sociocentric morality t so
perfectly with the ethnographies I had read in Fiske’s class. His
emphasis on the moral emotions was so satisfying after reading all
that cerebral cognitive-developmental work. I thought that if
somebody ran the right study—one that controlled for perceptions
of harm—Shweder’s claims about cultural di erences would survive
the test. I spent the next semester guring out how to become that
somebody.
I started writing very short stories about people who do o ensive
things, but do them in such a way that nobody is harmed. I called
these stories “harmless taboo violations,” and you read two of them
at the start of this chapter (about dog-eating and
chicken- … eating). I made up dozens of these stories but quickly
found that the ones that worked best fell into two categories:
disgust and disrespect. If you want to give people a quick ash of
revulsion but deprive them of any victim they can use to justify
moral condemnation, ask them about people who do disgusting or
disrespectful things, but make sure the actions are done in private

so that nobody else is o ended. For example, one of my disrespect
stories was: “A woman is cleaning out her closet, and she nds her
old American ag. She doesn’t want the ag anymore, so she cuts it
up into pieces and uses the rags to clean her bathroom.”
My idea was to give adults and children stories that pitted gut
feelings about important cultural norms against reasoning about
harmlessness, and then see which force was stronger. Turiel’s
rationalism predicted that reasoning about harm is the basis of
moral judgment, so even though people might say it’s wrong to eat
your dog, they would have to treat the act as a violation of a social
convention. (We don’t eat our dogs, but hey, if people in another
country want to eat their ex-pets rather than bury them, who are we
to criticize?) Shweder’s theory, on the other hand, said that Turiel’s
predictions should hold among members of individualistic secular
societies but not elsewhere. I now had a study designed. I just had
to nd the elsewhere.
I spoke Spanish fairly well, so when I learned that a major
conference of Latin American psychologists was to be held in
Buenos Aires in July 1989, I bought a plane ticket. I had no contacts
and no idea how to start an international research collaboration, so
I just went to every talk that had anything to do with morality. I
was chagrined to discover that psychology in Latin America was not
very scienti c. It was heavily theoretical, and much of that theory
was Marxist, focused on oppression, colonialism, and power. I was
beginning to despair when I chanced upon a session run by some
Brazilian psychologists who were using Kohlbergian methods to
study moral development. I spoke afterward to the chair of the
session, Angela Biaggio, and her graduate student Silvia Koller.
Even though they both liked Kohlberg’s approach, they were
interested in hearing about alternatives. Biaggio invited me to visit
them after the conference at their university in Porto Alegre, the
capital of the southernmost state in Brazil.
Southern Brazil is the most European part of the country, settled
largely by Portuguese, German, and Italian immigrants in the
nineteenth century. With its modern architecture and middle-class
prosperity, Porto Alegre didn’t look anything like the Latin America

of my imagination, so at rst I was disappointed. I wanted my
cross-cultural study to involve someplace exotic, like Orissa. But
Silvia Koller was a wonderful collaborator, and she had two great
ideas about how to increase our cultural diversity. First, she
suggested we run the study across social class. The divide between
rich and poor is so vast in Brazil that it’s as though people live in
di erent countries. We decided to interview adults and children
from the educated middle class, and also from the lower class—
adults who worked as servants for wealthy people (and who rarely
had more than an eighth-grade education) and children from a
public school in the neighborhood where many of the servants
lived. Second, Silvia had a friend who had just been hired as a
professor in Recife, a city in the northeastern tip of the country, a
region that is culturally very di erent from Porto Alegre. Silvia
arranged for me to visit her friend, Graça Dias, the following
month.
Silvia and I worked for two weeks with a team of undergraduate
students, translating the harmless taboo stories into Portuguese,
selecting the best ones, re ning the probe questions, and testing our
interview script to make sure that everything was understandable,
even by the least educated subjects, some of whom were illiterate.
Then I went o to Recife, where Graça and I trained a team of
students to conduct interviews in exactly the way they were being
done in Porto Alegre. In Recife I nally felt like I was working in an
exotic tropical locale, with Brazilian music wafting through the
streets and ripe mangoes falling from the trees. More important, the
people of northeast Brazil are mostly of mixed ancestry (African and
European), and the region is poorer and much less industrialized
than Porto Alegre.
When I returned to Philadelphia, I trained my own team of
interviewers and supervised the data collection for the four groups
of subjects in Philadelphia. The design of the study was therefore
what we call “three by two by two,” meaning that we had three
cities, and in each city we had two levels of social class (high and
low), and within each social class we had two age groups: children
(ages ten to twelve) and adults (ages eighteen to twenty-eight).

That made for twelve groups in all, with thirty people in each
group, for a total of 360 interviews. This large number of subjects
allowed me to run statistical tests to examine the independent
e ects of city, social class, and age. I predicted that Philadelphia
would be the most individualistic of the three cities (and therefore
the most Turiel-like) and Recife would be the most sociocentric (and
therefore more like Orissa in its judgments).
The results were as clear as could be in support of Shweder. First,
all four of my Philadelphia groups con rmed Turiel’s nding that
Americans make a big distinction between moral and conventional
violations. I used two stories taken directly from Turiel’s research: a
girl pushes a boy o a swing (that’s a clear moral violation) and a
boy refuses to wear a school uniform (that’s a conventional
violation). This validated my methods. It meant that any di erences
I found on the harmless taboo stories could not be attributed to
some quirk about the way I phrased the probe questions or trained
my interviewers. The upper-class Brazilians looked just like the
Americans on these stories. But the working-class Brazilian kids
usually thought that it was wrong, and universally wrong, to break
the social convention and not wear the uniform. In Recife in
particular, the working-class kids judged the uniform rebel in
exactly the same way they judged the swing-pusher. This pattern
supported Shweder: the size of the moral-conventional distinction
varied across cultural groups.
The second thing I found was that people responded to the
harmless taboo stories just as Shweder had predicted: the upperclass Philadelphians judged them to be violations of social
conventions, and the lower-class Recifeans judged them to be moral
violations. There were separate signi cant e ects of city (Porto
Alegreans moralized more than Philadelphians, and Recifeans
moralized more than Porto Alegreans), of social class (lower-class
groups moralized more than upper-class groups), and of age
(children moralized more than adults). Unexpectedly, the e ect of
social class was much larger than the e ect of city. In other words,
well-educated people in all three cities were more similar to each
other than they were to their lower-class neighbors. I had own ve

thousand miles south to search for moral variation when in fact
there was more to be found a few blocks west of campus, in the
poor neighborhood surrounding my university.
My third nding was that all the di erences I found held up when
I controlled for perceptions of harm. I had included a probe
question that directly asked, after each story: “Do you think anyone
was harmed by what [the person in the story] did?” If Shweder’s
ndings were caused by perceptions of hidden victims (as Turiel
proposed), then my cross-cultural di erences should have
disappeared when I removed the subjects who said yes to this
question. But when I ltered out these people, the cultural
di erences got bigger, not smaller. This was very strong support for
Shweder’s claim that the moral domain goes far beyond harm. Most
of my subjects said that the harmless-taboo violations were
universally wrong even though they harmed nobody.
In other words, Shweder won the debate. I had replicated Turiel’s
ndings using Turiel’s methods on people like me—educated
Westerners raised in an individualistic culture—but had con rmed
Shweder’s claim that Turiel’s theory didn’t travel well. The moral
domain varied across nations and social classes. For most of the
people in my study, the moral domain extended well beyond issues
of harm and fairness.
It was hard to see how a rationalist could explain these results.
How could children self-construct their moral knowledge about
disgust and disrespect from their private analyses of harmfulness?
There must be other sources of moral knowledge, including cultural
learning (as Shweder argued), or innate moral intuitions about
disgust and disrespect (as I began to argue years later).

I once overheard a Kohlberg-style moral judgment interview
being conducted in the bathroom of a McDonald’s restaurant in
northern Indiana. The person interviewed—the subject—was a
Caucasian male roughly thirty years old. The interviewer was a

Caucasian male approximately four years old. The interview
began at adjacent urinals:
INTERVIEWER:

Dad, what would happen if I pooped in here [the urinal]?

It would be yucky. Go ahead and
wash our hands.

SUBJECT:

ush. Come on, let’s go

[The pair then moved over to the sinks]
INTERVIEWER:
SUBJECT:

The people who work here would get mad at you.

INTERVIEWER:
SUBJECT:

home?

Well, what would happen if we all pooped in the sink at

[pause] I guess we’d all get in trouble.

INTERVIEWER:
SUBJECT:

What would happen if you pooped in the sink at home?

Mom would get mad at me.

INTERVIEWER:

SUBJECT:

What would happen if I pooped in the sink at home?

I’d get mad at you.

INTERVIEWER:
SUBJECT:

Dad, what would happen if I pooped in the sink?

[laughing] Yeah, we’d all get in trouble!

Come on, let’s dry our hands. We have to go.

Note the skill and persistence of the interviewer, who probes
for a deeper answer by changing the transgression to remove
the punisher. Yet even when everyone cooperates in the rule
violation so that nobody can play the role of punisher, the
subject still clings to a notion of cosmic justice in which,
somehow, the whole family would “get in trouble.”
Of course, the father is not really trying to demonstrate his
best moral reasoning. Moral reasoning is usually done to
in uence other people (see chapter 4), and what the father is

trying to do is get his curious son to feel the right emotions—
disgust and fear—to motivate appropriate bathroom behavior.

INVENTING VICTIMS
Even though the results came out just as Shweder had predicted,
there were a number of surprises along the way. The biggest
surprise was that so many subjects tried to invent victims. I had
written the stories carefully to remove all conceivable harm to
other people, yet in 38 percent of the 1,620 times that people heard
a harmless-o ensive story, they claimed that somebody was
harmed. In the dog story, for example, many people said that the
family itself would be harmed because they would get sick from
eating dog meat. Was this an example of the “informational
assumptions” that Turiel had talked about? Were people really
condemning the actions because they foresaw these harms, or was it
the reverse process—were people inventing these harms because
they had already condemned the actions?
I conducted many of the Philadelphia interviews myself, and it
was obvious that most of these supposed harms were post hoc
fabrications. People usually condemned the actions very quickly—
they didn’t seem to need much time to decide what they thought.
But it often took them a while to come up with a victim, and they
usually o ered those victims up halfheartedly and almost
apologetically. As one subject said, “Well, I don’t know, maybe the
woman will feel guilty afterward about throwing out her ag?”
Many of these victim claims were downright preposterous, such as
the child who justi ed his condemnation of the ag shredder by
saying that the rags might clog up the toilet and cause it to
over ow.
But something even more interesting happened when I or the
other interviewers challenged these invented-victim claims. I had
trained my interviewers to correct people gently when they made
claims that contradicted the text of the story. For example, if

someone said, “It’s wrong to cut up the ag because a neighbor
might see her do it, and he might be o ended,” the interviewer
replied, “Well, it says here in the story that nobody saw her do it.
So would you still say it was wrong for her to cut up her ag?” Yet
even when subjects recognized that their victim claims were bogus,
they still refused to say that the act was OK. Instead, they kept
searching for another victim. They said things like “I know it’s
wrong, but I just can’t think of a reason why.” They seemed to be
morally dumbfounded—rendered speechless by their inability to
explain verbally what they knew intuitively.29
These subjects were reasoning. They were working quite hard at
reasoning. But it was not reasoning in search of truth; it was
reasoning in support of their emotional reactions. It was reasoning
as described by the philosopher David Hume, who wrote in 1739
that “reason is, and ought only to be the slave of the passions, and
can never pretend to any other o ce than to serve and obey
them.”30
I had found evidence for Hume’s claim. I had found that moral
reasoning was often a servant of moral emotions, and this was a
challenge to the rationalist approach that dominated moral
psychology. I published these ndings in one of the top psychology
journals in October 199331 and then waited nervously for the
response. I knew that the eld of moral psychology was not going
to change overnight just because one grad student produced some
data that didn’t t into the prevailing paradigm. I knew that debates
in moral psychology could be quite heated (though always civil).
What I did not expect, however, was that there would be no
response at all. Here I thought I had done the de nitive study to
settle a major debate in moral psychology, yet almost nobody cited
my work—not even to attack it—in the rst ve years after I
published it.
My dissertation landed with a silent thud in part because I
published it in a social psychology journal. But in the early 1990s,
the eld of moral psychology was still a part of developmental
psychology. If you called yourself a moral psychologist, it meant
that you studied moral reasoning and how it changed with age, and

you cited Kohlberg extensively whether you agreed with him or
not.
But psychology itself was about to change and become a lot more
emotional.
IN SUM
Where does morality come from? The two most common answers
have long been that it is innate (the nativist answer) or that it
comes from childhood learning (the empiricist answer). In this
chapter I considered a third possibility, the rationalist answer,
which dominated moral psychology when I entered the eld: that
morality is self-constructed by children on the basis of their
experiences with harm. Kids know that harm is wrong because they
hate to be harmed, and they gradually come to see that it is
therefore wrong to harm others, which leads them to understand
fairness and eventually justice. I explained why I came to reject this
answer after conducting research in Brazil and the United States. I
concluded instead that:
• The moral domain varies by culture. It is unusually
narrow in Western, educated, and individualistic
cultures. Sociocentric cultures broaden the moral domain
to encompass and regulate more aspects of life.
• People sometimes have gut feelings—particularly about
disgust and disrespect—that can drive their reasoning.
Moral reasoning is sometimes a post hoc fabrication.
• Morality can’t be entirely self-constructed by children
based on their growing understanding of harm. Cultural
learning or guidance must play a larger role than
rationalist theories had given it.
If morality doesn’t come primarily from reasoning, then that
leaves some combination of innateness and social learning as the
most likely candidates. In the rest of this book I’ll try to explain

how morality can be innate (as a set of evolved intuitions) and
learned (as children learn to apply those intuitions within a
particular culture). We’re born to be righteous, but we have to learn
what, exactly, people like us should be righteous about.

