TWO

The Intuitive Dog and Its Rational Tail

One of the greatest truths in psychology is that the mind is divided
into parts that sometimes con ict.1 To be human is to feel pulled in
di erent directions, and to marvel—sometimes in horror—at your
inability to control your own actions. The Roman poet Ovid lived at
a time when people thought diseases were caused by imbalances of
bile, but he knew enough psychology to have one of his characters
lament: “I am dragged along by a strange new force. Desire and
reason are pulling in di erent directions. I see the right way and
approve it, but follow the wrong.”2
Ancient thinkers gave us many metaphors to understand this
con ict, but few are more colorful than the one in Plato’s dialogue
Timaeus. The narrator, Timaeus, explains how the gods created the
universe, including us. Timaeus says that a creator god who was
perfect and created only perfect things was lling his new universe
with souls—and what could be more perfect in a soul than perfect
rationality? So after making a large number of perfect, rational
souls, the creator god decided to take a break, delegating the last
bits of creation to some lesser deities, who did their best to design
vessels for these souls.
The deities began by encasing the souls in that most perfect of
shapes, the sphere, which explains why our heads are more or less
round. But they quickly realized that these spherical heads would
face di culties and indignities as they rolled around the uneven
surface of the Earth. So the gods created bodies to carry the heads,
and they animated each body with a second soul—vastly inferior
because it was neither rational nor immortal. This second soul
contained

those dreadful but necessary disturbances: pleasure, rst
of all, evil’s most powerful lure; then pains, that make us
run away from what is good; besides these, boldness also
and fear, foolish counselors both; then also the spirit of
anger hard to assuage, and expectation easily led astray.
These they fused with unreasoning sense perception and
all-venturing lust, and so, as was necessary, they
constructed the mortal type of soul.3
Pleasures, emotions, senses … all were necessary evils. To give
the divine head a bit of distance from the seething body and its
“foolish counsel,” the gods invented the neck.
Most creation myths situate a tribe or ancestor at the center of
creation, so it seems odd to give the honor to a mental faculty—at
least until you realize that this philosopher’s myth makes
philosophers look pretty darn good. It justi es their perpetual
employment as the high priests of reason, or as dispassionate
philosopher-kings. It’s the ultimate rationalist fantasy—the passions
are and ought only to be the servants of reason, to reverse Hume’s
formulation. And just in case there was any doubt about Plato’s
contempt for the passions, Timaeus adds that a man who masters his
emotions will live a life of reason and justice, and will be reborn
into a celestial heaven of eternal happiness. A man who is mastered
by his passions, however, will be reincarnated as a woman.
Western philosophy has been worshipping reason and distrusting
the passions for thousands of years.4 There’s a direct line running
from Plato through Immanuel Kant to Lawrence Kohlberg. I’ll refer
to this worshipful attitude throughout this book as the rationalist
delusion. I call it a delusion because when a group of people make
something sacred, the members of the cult lose the ability to think
clearly about it. Morality binds and blinds. The true believers
produce pious fantasies that don’t match reality, and at some point
somebody comes along to knock the idol o its pedestal. That was
Hume’s project, with his philosophically sacrilegious claim that
reason was nothing but the servant of the passions.5

Thomas Je erson o ered a more balanced model of the
relationship between reason and emotion. In 1786, while serving as
the American minister to France, Je erson fell in love. Maria
Cosway was a beautiful twenty-seven-year-old English artist who
was introduced to Je erson by a mutual friend. Je erson and
Cosway then spent the next few hours doing exactly what people
should do to fall madly in love. They strolled around Paris on a
perfect sunny day, two foreigners sharing each other’s aesthetic
appreciations of a grand city. Je erson sent messengers bearing lies
to cancel his evening meetings so that he could extend the day into
night. Cosway was married, although the marriage seems to have
been an open marriage of convenience, and historians do not know
how far the romance progressed in the weeks that followed.6 But
Cosway’s husband soon insisted on taking his wife back to England,
leaving Je erson in pain.
To ease that pain, Je erson wrote Cosway a love letter using a
literary trick to cloak the impropriety of writing about love to a
married woman. Je erson wrote the letter as a dialogue between
his head and his heart debating the wisdom of having pursued a
“friendship” even while he knew it would have to end. Je erson’s
head is the Platonic ideal of reason, scolding the heart for having
dragged them both into yet another ne mess. The heart asks the
head for pity, but the head responds with a stern lecture:
Everything in this world is a matter of calculation.
Advance then with caution, the balance in your hand.
Put into one scale the pleasures which any object may
o er; but put fairly into the other the pains which are to
follow, & see which preponderates.7
After taking round after round of abuse rather passively, the heart
nally rises to defend itself, and to put the head in its proper place
—which is to handle problems that don’t involve people:
When nature assigned us the same habitation, she gave
us over it a divided empire. To you she allotted the eld

of science; to me that of morals. When the circle is to be
squared, or the orbit of a comet to be traced; when the
arch of greatest strength, or the solid of least resistance
is to be investigated, take up the problem; it is yours;
nature has given me no cognizance of it. In like manner,
in denying to you the feelings of sympathy, of
benevolence, of gratitude, of justice, of love, of
friendship, she has excluded you from their control. To
these she has adapted the mechanism of the heart.
Morals were too essential to the happiness of man to be
risked on the incertain combinations of the head. She
laid their foundation therefore in sentiment, not in
science.8
So now we have three models of the mind. Plato said that reason
ought to be the master, even if philosophers are the only ones who
can reach a high level of mastery.9 Hume said that reason is and
ought to be the servant of the passions. And Je erson gives us a
third option, in which reason and sentiment are (and ought to be)
independent co-rulers, like the emperors of Rome, who divided the
empire into eastern and western halves. Who is right?
WILSON’S PROPHECY
Plato, Hume, and Je erson tried to understand the design of the
human mind without the help of the most powerful tool ever
devised for understanding the design of living things: Darwin’s
theory of evolution. Darwin was fascinated by morality because any
example of cooperation among living creatures had to be squared
with his general emphasis on competition and the “survival of the
ttest.”10 Darwin o ered several explanations for how morality
could have evolved, and many of them pointed to emotions such as
sympathy, which he thought was the “foundation-stone” of the
social instincts.11 He also wrote about feelings of shame and pride,
which were associated with the desire for a good reputation.

Darwin was a nativist about morality: he thought that natural
selection gave us minds that were preloaded with moral emotions.
But as the social sciences advanced in the twentieth century, their
course was altered by two waves of moralism that turned nativism
into a moral o ense. The
rst was the horror among
anthropologists and others at “social Darwinism”—the idea (raised
but not endorsed by Darwin) that the richest and most successful
nations, races, and individuals are the ttest. Therefore, giving
charity to the poor interferes with the natural progress of evolution:
it allows the poor to breed.12 The claim that some races were
innately superior to others was later championed by Hitler, and so if
Hitler was a nativist, then all nativists were Nazis. (That conclusion
is illogical, but it makes sense emotionally if you dislike
nativism.)13
The second wave of moralism was the radical politics that washed
over universities in America, Europe, and Latin America in the
1960s and 1970s. Radical reformers usually want to believe that
human nature is a blank slate on which any utopian vision can be
sketched. If evolution gave men and women di erent sets of desires
and skills, for example, that would be an obstacle to achieving
gender equality in many professions. If nativism could be used to
justify existing power structures, then nativism must be wrong.
(Again, this is a logical error, but this is the way righteous minds
work.)
The cognitive scientist Steven Pinker was a graduate student at
Harvard in the 1970s. In his 2002 book The Blank Slate: The Modern
Denial of Human Nature, Pinker describes the ways scientists
betrayed the values of science to maintain loyalty to the progressive
movement. Scientists became “moral exhibitionists” in the lecture
hall as they demonized fellow scientists and urged their students to
evaluate ideas not for their truth but for their consistency with
progressive ideals such as racial and gender equality.14
Nowhere was the betrayal of science more evident than in the
attacks on Edward O. Wilson, a lifelong student of ants and
ecosystems. In 1975 Wilson published Sociobiology: The New
Synthesis. The book explored how natural selection, which

indisputably shaped animal bodies, also shaped animal behavior.
That wasn’t controversial, but Wilson had the audacity to suggest in
his nal chapter that natural selection also in uenced human
behavior. Wilson believed that there is such a thing as human
nature, and that human nature constrains the range of what we can
achieve when raising our children or designing new social
institutions.
Wilson used ethics to illustrate his point. He was a professor at
Harvard, along with Lawrence Kohlberg and the philosopher John
Rawls, so he was well acquainted with their brand of rationalist
theorizing about rights and justice.15 It seemed clear to Wilson that
what the rationalists were really doing was generating clever
justi cations for moral intuitions that were best explained by
evolution. Do people believe in human rights because such rights
actually exist, like mathematical truths, sitting on a cosmic shelf
next to the Pythagorean theorem just waiting to be discovered by
Platonic reasoners? Or do people feel revulsion and sympathy when
they read accounts of torture, and then invent a story about
universal rights to help justify their feelings?
Wilson sided with Hume. He charged that what moral
philosophers were really doing was fabricating justi cations after
“consulting the emotive centers” of their own brains.16 He predicted
that the study of ethics would soon be taken out of the hands of
philosophers and “biologicized,” or made to t with the emerging
science of human nature. Such a linkage of philosophy, biology, and
evolution would be an example of the “new synthesis” that Wilson
dreamed of, and that he later referred to as consilience—the
“jumping together” of ideas to create a uni ed body of
knowledge.17
Prophets challenge the status quo, often earning the hatred of
those in power. Wilson therefore deserves to be called a prophet of
moral psychology. He was harassed and excoriated in print and in
public.18 He was called a fascist, which justi ed (for some) the
charge that he was a racist, which justi ed (for some) the attempt
to stop him from speaking in public. Protesters who tried to disrupt

one of his scienti c talks rushed the stage and chanted, “Racist
Wilson, you can’t hide, we charge you with genocide.”19
THE EMOTIONAL NINETIES
By the time I entered graduate school, in 1987, the shooting had
stopped and sociobiology had been discredited—at least, that’s the
message I picked up from hearing scientists use the word as a
pejorative term for the naive attempt to reduce psychology to
evolution. Moral psychology was not about evolved emotions, it
was about the development of reasoning and information
processing.20
Yet when I looked outside of psychology, I found many
wonderful books on the emotional basis of morality. I read Frans de
Waal’s Good Natured: The Origins of Right and Wrong in Humans and
Other Animals.21 De Waal did not claim that chimpanzees had
morality; he argued only that chimps (and other apes) have most of
the psychological building blocks that humans use to construct
moral systems and communities. These building blocks are largely
emotional, such as feelings of sympathy, fear, anger, and a ection.
I also read Descartes’ Error, by the neuroscientist Antonio
Damasio.22 Damasio had noticed an unusual pattern of symptoms in
patients who had su ered brain damage to a speci c part of the
brain—the ventromedial (i.e., bottom-middle) prefrontal cortex
(abbreviated vmPFC; it’s the region just behind and above the
bridge of the nose). Their emotionality dropped nearly to zero.
They could look at the most joyous or gruesome photographs and
feel nothing. They retained full knowledge of what was right and
wrong, and they showed no de cits in IQ. They even scored well on
Kohlberg’s tests of moral reasoning. Yet when it came to making
decisions in their personal lives and at work, they made foolish
decisions or no decisions at all. They alienated their families and
their employers, and their lives fell apart.
Damasio’s interpretation was that gut feelings and bodily
reactions were necessary to think rationally, and that one job of the

vmPFC was to integrate those gut feelings into a person’s conscious
deliberations. When you weigh the advantages and disadvantages of
murdering your parents … you can’t even do it, because feelings of
horror come rushing in through the vmPFC.
But Damasio’s patients could think about anything, with no
ltering or coloring from their emotions. With the vmPFC shut
down, every option at every moment felt as good as every other.
The only way to make a decision was to examine each option,
weighing the pros and cons using conscious, verbal reasoning. If
you’ve ever shopped for an appliance about which you have few
feelings—say, a washing machine—you know how hard it can be
once the number of options exceeds six or seven (which is the
capacity of our short-term memory). Just imagine what your life
would be like if at every moment, in every social situation, picking
the right thing to do or say became like picking the best washing
machine among ten options, minute after minute, day after day.
You’d make foolish decisions too.
Damasio’s ndings were as anti-Platonic as could be. Here were
people in whom brain damage had essentially shut down
communication between the rational soul and the seething passions
of the body (which, unbeknownst to Plato, were not based in the
heart and stomach but in the emotion areas of the brain). No more
of those “dreadful but necessary disturbances,” those “foolish
counselors” leading the rational soul astray. Yet the result of the
separation was not the liberation of reason from the thrall of the
passions. It was the shocking revelation that reasoning requires the
passions. Je erson’s model ts better: when one co-emperor is
knocked out and the other tries to rule the empire by himself, he’s
not up to the task.
If Je erson’s model were correct, however, then Damasio’s
patients should still have fared well in the half of life that was
always ruled by the head. Yet the collapse of decision making, even
in purely analytic and organizational tasks, was pervasive. The head
can’t even do head stu without the heart. So Hume’s model t
these cases best: when the master (passions) drops dead, the servant

(reasoning) has neither the ability nor the desire to keep the estate
running. Everything goes to ruin.
WHY ATHEISTS WON’T SELL THEIR SOULS
In 1995 I moved to the University of Virginia (UVA) to begin my
rst job as a professor. Moral psychology was still devoted to the
study of moral reasoning. But if you looked beyond developmental
psychology, Wilson’s new synthesis was beginning. A few
economists, philosophers, and neuroscientists were quietly
constructing an alternative approach to morality, one whose
foundation was the emotions, and the emotions were assumed to
have been shaped by evolution.23 These synthesizers were assisted
by the rebirth of sociobiology in 1992 under a new name—
evolutionary psychology.24
I read Je erson’s letter to Cosway during my rst month in
Charlottesville, as part of my initiation into his cult. (Je erson
founded UVA in 1819, and here at “Mr. Je erson’s University” we
regard him as a deity.) But I had already arrived at a Je ersonian
view in which moral emotions and moral reasoning were separate
processes.25 Each process could make moral judgments on its own,
and they sometimes fought it out for the right to do so ( gure 2.1).
In my rst few years at UVA I conducted several experiments to
test this dual-process model by asking people to make judgments
under conditions that strengthened or weakened one of the
processes. For example, social psychologists often ask people to
perform tasks while carrying a heavy cognitive load, such as
holding the number 7250475 in mind, or while carrying a light
cognitive load, such as remembering just the number 7. If
performance su ers while people are carrying the heavy load, then
we can conclude that “controlled” thinking (such as conscious
reasoning) is necessary for that particular task. But if people do ne
on the task regardless of the load, then we can conclude that
“automatic” processes (such as intuition and emotion) are su cient
for performing that task.

2.1. My early Je ersonian dual-process model. Emotion and
reasoning are separate paths to moral judgment, although moral
judgment can sometimes lead to post hoc reasoning as well.
FIGURE

My question was simple: Can people make moral judgments just
as well when carrying a heavy cognitive load as when carrying a
light one? The answer turned out to be yes. I found no di erence
between conditions, no e ect of cognitive load. I tried it again with
di erent stories and got the same outcome. I tried another
manipulation: I used a computer program to force some people to
answer quickly, before they had time to think, and I forced other
people to wait ten seconds before o ering their judgment. Surely
that manipulation would weaken or strengthen moral reasoning and
shift the balance of power, I thought. But it didn’t.26
When I came to UVA I was certain that a Je ersonian dualprocess model was right, but I kept failing in my e orts to prove it.
My tenure clock was ticking, and I was getting nervous. I had to
produce a string of publications in top journals within ve years or
I’d be turned down for tenure and forced to leave UVA.
In the meantime, I started running studies to follow up on the moral
dumbfounding I had observed a few years earlier in my dissertation
interviews. I worked with a talented undergraduate, Scott Murphy.
Our plan was to increase the amount of dumbfounding by having
Scott play devil’s advocate rather than gentle interviewer. When
Scott succeeded in stripping away arguments, would people change
their judgments? Or would they become morally dumbfounded,
clinging to their initial judgments while stammering and grasping
for reasons?

Scott brought thirty UVA students into the lab, one at a time, for
an extended interview. He explained that his job was to challenge
their reasoning, no matter what they said. He then took them
through ve scenarios. One was Kohlberg’s Heinz dilemma: Should
Heinz steal a drug to save his wife’s life? We predicted that this
story would produce little dumbfounding. It pitted concerns about
harm and life against concerns about law and property rights, and
the story was well constructed to elicit cool, rational moral
reasoning. Sure enough, Scott couldn’t whip up any dumbfounding
with the Heinz story. People o ered good reasons for their answers,
and Scott was not able to get them to abandon principles such as
“Life is more important than property.”
We also chose two scenarios that played more directly on gut
feelings. In the “roach juice” scenario, Scott opened a small can of
apple juice, poured it into a new plastic cup, and asked the subject
to take a sip. Everyone did. Then Scott brought out a white plastic
box and said:
I have here in this container a sterilized cockroach. We
bought some cockroaches from a laboratory supply
company. The roaches were raised in a clean
environment. But just to be certain, we sterilized the
roaches again in an autoclave, which heats everything so
hot that no germs can survive. I’m going to dip this
cockroach into the juice, like this [using a tea strainer].
Now, would you take a sip?
In the second scenario, Scott o ered subjects $2 if they would
sign a piece of paper that said: I, ________, hereby sell my soul, after my
death, to Scott Murphy, for the sum of $2. There was a line for a
signature, and below the line was this note: This form is part of a
psychology experiment. It is NOT a legal or binding contract, in any
way.27 Scott also told them they could rip up the paper as soon as
they signed it, and they’d still get their $2.
Only 23 percent of subjects were willing to sign the paper
without any goading from Scott. We were a bit surprised to nd

that 37 percent were willing to take a sip of the roach juice.28 In
these cases, Scott couldn’t play devil’s advocate.
For the majorities who said no, however, Scott asked them to
explain their reasons and did his best to challenge those reasons.
Scott convinced an extra 10 percent to sip the juice, and an extra 17
percent to sign the soul-selling paper. But most people in both
scenarios clung to their initial refusal, even though many of them
could not generate good reasons. A few people confessed that they
were atheists, didn’t believe in souls, and yet still felt
uncomfortable about signing.
Here too there wasn’t much dumbfounding. People felt that it was
ultimately their own choice whether or not to drink the juice or sign
the paper, so most subjects seemed comfortable saying, “I just don’t
want to do it, even though I can’t give you a reason.”
The main point of the study was to examine responses to two
harmless taboo violations. We wanted to know if the moral
judgment of disturbing but harmless events would look more like
judgments in the Heinz task (closely linked to reasoning), or like
those in the roach juice and soul-selling tasks (where people readily
confessed that they were following gut feelings). Here’s one story
we used:
Julie and Mark, who are sister and brother, are traveling
together in France. They are both on summer vacation
from college. One night they are staying alone in a cabin
near the beach. They decide that it would be interesting
and fun if they tried making love. At the very least it
would be a new experience for each of them. Julie is
already taking birth control pills, but Mark uses a
condom too, just to be safe. They both enjoy it, but they
decide not to do it again. They keep that night as a
special secret between them, which makes them feel
even closer to each other. So what do you think about
this? Was it wrong for them to have sex?

In the other harmless-taboo story, Jennifer works in a hospital
pathology lab. She’s a vegetarian for moral reasons—she think it’s
wrong to kill animals. But one night she has to incinerate a fresh
human cadaver, and she thinks it’s a waste to throw away perfectly
edible esh. So she cuts o a piece of esh and takes it home. Then
she cooks it and eats it.
We knew these stories were disgusting, and we expected that
they’d trigger immediate moral condemnation. Only 20 percent of
subjects said it was OK for Julie and Mark to have sex, and only 13
percent said it was OK for Jennifer to eat part of a cadaver. But
when Scott asked people to explain their judgments and then
challenged those explanations, he found exactly the Humean pattern
that we had predicted. In these harmless-taboo scenarios, people
generated far more reasons and discarded far more reasons than in
any of the other scenarios. They seemed to be ailing around,
throwing out reason after reason, and rarely changing their minds
when Scott proved that their latest reason was not relevant. Here is
the transcript of one interview about the incest story:
So what do you think about this, was it wrong
for Julie and Mark to have sex?

EXPERIMENTER:

Yeah, I think it’s totally wrong to have sex. You
know, because I’m pretty religious and I just think incest
is wrong anyway. But, I don’t know.

SUBJECT:

EXPERIMENTER:

What’s wrong with incest, would you say?

Um, the whole idea of, well, I’ve heard—I don’t
even know if this is true, but in the case, if the girl did
get pregnant, the kids become deformed, most of the
time, in cases like that.

SUBJECT:

EXPERIMENTER:

—

SUBJECT:

But they used a condom and birth control pills

Oh, OK. Yeah, you did say that.

EXPERIMENTER:

—so there’s no way they’re going to have a kid.

Well, I guess the safest sex is abstinence, but, um,
uh … um, I don’t know, I just think that’s wrong. I don’t
know, what did you ask me?

SUBJECT:

EXPERIMENTER:
SUBJECT:

Was it wrong for them to have sex?

Yeah, I think it’s wrong.

And I’m trying to
is wrong with it.

EXPERIMENTER:

nd out why, what you think

OK, um … well … let’s see, let me think about this.
Um—how old were they?

SUBJECT:

EXPERIMENTER:

They were college age, around 20 or so.

Oh, oh [looks disappointed]. I don’t know, I
just … it’s just not something you’re brought up to do.
It’s just not—well, I mean I wasn’t. I assume most people
aren’t [laughs]. I just think that you shouldn’t—I don’t—
I guess my reason is, um … just that, um … you’re not
brought up to it. You don’t see it. It’s not, um—I don’t
think it’s accepted. That’s pretty much it.

SUBJECT:

You wouldn’t say anything you’re not brought
up to see is wrong, would you? For example, if you’re
not brought up to see women working outside the home,
would you say that makes it wrong for women to work?

EXPERIMENTER:

Um … well … oh, gosh. This is hard. I really—um, I
mean, there’s just no way I could change my mind but I
just don’t know how to—how to show what I’m feeling,
what I feel about it. It’s crazy!29

SUBJECT:

In this transcript and in many others, it’s obvious that people
were making a moral judgment immediately and emotionally.
Reasoning was merely the servant of the passions, and when the
servant failed to nd any good arguments, the master did not
change his mind. We quanti ed some of the behaviors that seemed
most indicative of being morally dumbfounded, and these analyses

showed big di erences between the way people responded to the
harmless-taboo scenarios compared to the Heinz dilemma.30
These results supported Hume, not Je erson or Plato. People
made moral judgments quickly and emotionally. Moral reasoning
was mostly just a post hoc search for reasons to justify the
judgments people had already made. But were these judgments
representative of moral judgment in general? I had to write some
bizarre stories to give people these ashes of moral intuition that
they could not easily explain. That can’t be how most of our
thinking works, can it?
“SEEING-THAT” VERSUS “REASONING-WHY”
Two years before Scott and I ran the dumbfounding studies I read
an extraordinary book that psychologists rarely mention: Patterns,
Thinking, and Cognition, by Howard Margolis, a professor of public
policy at the University of Chicago. Margolis was trying to
understand why people’s beliefs about political issues are often so
poorly connected to objective facts, and he hoped that cognitive
science could solve the puzzle. Yet Margolis was turned o by the
approaches to thinking that were prevalent in the 1980s, most of
which used the metaphor of the mind as a computer.
Margolis thought that a better model for studying higher
cognition, such as political thinking, was lower cognition, such as
vision, which works largely by rapid unconscious pattern matching.
He began his book with an investigation of perceptual illusions,
such as the well-known Muller-Lyer illusion ( gure 2.2), in which
one line continues to look longer than the other even after you
know that the two lines are the same length. He then moved on to
logic problems such as the Wason 4-card task, in which you are
shown four cards on a table.31 You know that each card comes from
a deck in which all cards have a letter on one side and a number on
the other. Your task is to choose the smallest number of cards in
gure 2.3 that you must turn over to decide whether this rule is

true: “If there is a vowel on one side, then there is an even number
on the other side.”
Everyone immediately sees that you have to turn over the E, but
many people also say you need to turn over the 4. They seem to be
doing simple-minded pattern matching: There was a vowel and an
even number in the question, so let’s turn over the vowel and the even
number. Many people resist the explanation of the simple logic
behind the task: turning over the 4 and nding a B on the other side
would not invalidate the rule, whereas turning over the 7 and
nding a U would do it, so you need to turn over the E and the 7.

FIGURE

2.2. The Muller-Lyer illusion.

2.3. The Wason 4-card task. Which card(s) must you turn over
to verify the rule that if a card shows a vowel on one face, then it
has an even number on the other?

FIGURE

When people are told up front what the answer is and asked to
explain why that answer is correct, they can do it. But amazingly,
they are just as able to o er an explanation, and just as con dent in

their reasoning, whether they are told the right answer (E and 7) or
the popular but wrong answer (E and 4).32 Findings such as these
led Wason to the conclusion that judgment and justi cation are
separate processes. Margolis shared Wason’s view, summarizing the
state of a airs like this:
Given the judgments (themselves produced by the nonconscious cognitive machinery in the brain, sometimes
correctly, sometimes not so), human beings produce
rationales they believe account for their judgments. But
the rationales (on this argument) are only ex post
rationalizations.33
Margolis proposed that there are two very di erent kinds of
cognitive processes at work when we make judgments and solve
problems: “seeing-that” and “reasoning-why.” “Seeing-that” is the
pattern matching that brains have been doing for hundreds of
millions of years. Even the simplest animals are wired to respond to
certain patterns of input (such as light, or sugar) with speci c
behaviors (such as turning away from the light, or stopping and
eating the sugary food). Animals easily learn new patterns and
connect them up to their existing behaviors, which can be
recon gured into new patterns as well (as when an animal trainer
teaches an elephant a new trick).
As brains get larger and more complex, animals begin to show
more cognitive sophistication—making choices (such as where to
forage today, or when to y south) and judgments (such as whether
a subordinate chimpanzee showed properly deferential behavior).
But in all cases, the basic psychology is pattern matching. It’s the
sort of rapid, automatic, and e ortless processing that drives our
perceptions in the Muller-Lyer illusion. You can’t choose whether or
not to see the illusion; you’re just “seeing-that” one line is longer
than the other. Margolis also called this kind of thinking “intuitive.”
“Reasoning-why,” in contrast, is the process “by which we
describe how we think we reached a judgment, or how we think
another person could reach that judgment.”34 “Reasoning-why” can

occur only for creatures that have language and a need to explain
themselves to other creatures. “Reasoning-why” is not automatic;
it’s conscious, it sometimes feels like work, and it’s easily disrupted
by cognitive load. Kohlberg had convinced moral psychologists to
study “reasoning-why” and to neglect “seeing-that.”35
Margolis’s ideas were a perfect t with everything I had seen in
my studies: rapid intuitive judgment (“That’s just wrong!”) followed
by slow and sometimes tortuous justi cations (“Well, their two
methods of birth control might fail, and the kids they produce might
be deformed”). The intuition launched the reasoning, but the
intuition did not depend on the success or failure of the reasoning.
My harmless-taboo stories were like Muller-Lyer illusions: they still
felt wrong, even after you had measured the amount of harm
involved and agreed that the stories were harmless.
Margolis’s theory worked just as well for the easier dilemmas. In
the Heinz scenario, most people intuitively “see that” Heinz should
steal the drug (his wife’s life is at stake), but in this case it’s easy to
nd reasons. Kohlberg had constructed the dilemma to make good
reasons available on both sides, so nobody gets dumbfounded.
The roach juice and soul-selling dilemmas instantly make people
“see that” they want to refuse, but they don’t feel much
conversational pressure to o er reasons. Not wanting to drink
roach-tainted juice isn’t a moral judgment, it’s a personal
preference. Saying “Because I don’t want to” is a perfectly
acceptable justi cation for one’s subjective preferences. Yet moral
judgments are not subjective statements; they are claims that
somebody did something wrong. I can’t call for the community to
punish you simply because I don’t like what you’re doing. I have to
point to something outside of my own preferences, and that
pointing is our moral reasoning. We do moral reasoning not to
reconstruct the actual reasons why we ourselves came to a judgment;
we reason to nd the best possible reasons why somebody else ought
to join us in our judgment.36
THE RIDER AND THE ELEPHANT

It took me years to appreciate fully the implications of Margolis’s
ideas. Part of the problem was that my thinking was entrenched in a
prevalent but useless dichotomy between cognition and emotion.
After failing repeatedly to get cognition to act independently of
emotion, I began to realize that the dichotomy made no sense.
Cognition just refers to information processing, which includes
higher cognition (such as conscious reasoning) as well as lower
cognition (such as visual perception and memory retrieval).37
Emotion is a bit harder to de ne. Emotions were long thought to
be dumb and visceral, but beginning in the 1980s, scientists
increasingly recognized that emotions were lled with cognition.
Emotions occur in steps, the rst of which is to appraise something
that just happened based on whether it advanced or hindered your
goals.38 These appraisals are a kind of information processing; they
are cognitions. When an appraisal program detects particular input
patterns, it launches a set of changes in your brain that prepare you
to respond appropriately. For example, if you hear someone running
up behind you on a dark street, your fear system detects a threat
and triggers your sympathetic nervous system, ring up the ghtor- ight response, cranking up your heart rate, and widening your
pupils to help you take in more information.
Emotions are not dumb. Damasio’s patients made terrible
decisions because they were deprived of emotional input into their
decision making. Emotions are a kind of information processing.39
Contrasting emotion with cognition is therefore as pointless as
contrasting rain with weather, or cars with vehicles.
Margolis helped me ditch the emotion-cognition contrast. His
work helped me see that moral judgment is a cognitive process, as are
all forms of judgment. The crucial distinction is really between two
di erent kinds of cognition: intuition and reasoning. Moral emotions
are one type of moral intuition, but most moral intuitions are more
subtle; they don’t rise to the level of emotions.40 The next time you
read a newspaper or drive a car, notice the many tiny ashes of
condemnation that it through your consciousness. Is each such
ash an emotion? Or ask yourself whether it is better to save the
lives of ve strangers or one (assuming all else is equal). Do you

need an emotion to tell you to go for the ve? Do you need
reasoning? No, you just see, instantly, that ve is better than one.
Intuition is the best word to describe the dozens or hundreds of
rapid, e ortless moral judgments and decisions that we all make
every day. Only a few of these intuitions come to us embedded in
full-blown emotions.
In The Happiness Hypothesis, I called these two kinds of cognition
the rider (controlled processes, including “reasoning-why”) and the
elephant (automatic processes, including emotion, intuition, and all
forms of “seeing-that”).41 I chose an elephant rather than a horse
because elephants are so much bigger—and smarter—than horses.
Automatic processes run the human mind, just as they have been
running animal minds for 500 million years, so they’re very good at
what they do, like software that has been improved through
thousands of product cycles. When human beings evolved the
capacity for language and reasoning at some point in the last
million years, the brain did not rewire itself to hand over the reins
to a new and inexperienced charioteer. Rather, the rider (languagebased reasoning) evolved because it did something useful for the
elephant.
The rider can do several useful things. It can see further into the
future (because we can examine alternative scenarios in our heads)
and therefore it can help the elephant make better decisions in the
present. It can learn new skills and master new technologies, which
can be deployed to help the elephant reach its goals and sidestep
disasters. And, most important, the rider acts as the spokesman for
the elephant, even though it doesn’t necessarily know what the
elephant is really thinking. The rider is skilled at fabricating post
hoc explanations for whatever the elephant has just done, and it is
good at nding reasons to justify whatever the elephant wants to do
next. Once human beings developed language and began to use it to
gossip about each other, it became extremely valuable for elephants
to carry around on their backs a full-time public relations rm.42
I didn’t have the rider and elephant metaphor back in the 1990s,
but once I stopped thinking about emotion versus cognition and
started thinking about intuition versus reasoning, everything fell

into place. I took my old Je ersonian dual-process model ( gure
2.1) and made two big changes. First, I weakened the arrow from
reasoning to judgment, demoting it to a dotted line (link 5 in gure
2.4). The dots mean that independently reasoned judgment is
possible in theory but rare in practice. This simple change converted
the model into a Humean model in which intuition (rather than
passion) is the main cause of moral judgment (link 1), and then
reasoning typically follows that judgment (link 2) to construct post
hoc justi cations. Reason is the servant of the intuitions. The rider
was put there in the rst place to serve the elephant.
I also wanted to capture the social nature of moral judgment.
Moral talk serves a variety of strategic purposes such as managing
your reputation, building alliances, and recruiting bystanders to
support your side in the disputes that are so common in daily life. I
wanted to go beyond the rst judgments people make when they
hear some juicy gossip or witness some surprising event. I wanted
my model to capture the give-and-take, the round after round of
discussion and argumentation that sometimes leads people to
change their minds.

2.4. The social intuitionist model. Intuitions come rst and
reasoning is usually produced after a judgment is made, in order to
in uence other people. But as a discussion progresses, the reasons
given by other people sometimes change our intuitions and
FIGURE

judgments. (From Haidt 2001, p. 815. Published by the American
Psychological Association. Adapted with permission.)
We make our rst judgments rapidly, and we are dreadful at
seeking out evidence that might discon rm those initial
judgments.43 Yet friends can do for us what we cannot do for
ourselves: they can challenge us, giving us reasons and arguments
(link 3) that sometimes trigger new intuitions, thereby making it
possible for us to change our minds. We occasionally do this when
mulling a problem by ourselves, suddenly seeing things in a new
light or from a new perspective (to use two visual metaphors). Link
6 in the model represents this process of private re ection. The line
is dotted because this process doesn’t seem to happen very often.44
For most of us, it’s not every day or even every month that we
change our mind about a moral issue without any prompting from
anyone else.
Far more common than such private mind changing is social
in uence. Other people in uence us constantly just by revealing
that they like or dislike somebody. That form of in uence is link 4,
the social persuasion link. Many of us believe that we follow an
inner moral compass, but the history of social psychology richly
demonstrates that other people exert a powerful force, able to make
cruelty seem acceptable45 and altruism seem embarrassing,46
without giving us any reasons or arguments.
Because of these two changes I called my theory the “social
intuitionist model of moral judgment,” and I published it in 2001 in
an article titled “The Emotional Dog and Its Rational Tail.”47 In
hindsight I wish I’d called the dog “intuitive” because psychologists
who are still entrenched in the emotion-versus-cognition dichotomy
often assume from the title that I’m saying that morality is always
driven by emotion. Then they prove that cognition matters, and
think they have found evidence against intuitionism.48 But intuitions
(including emotional responses) are a kind of cognition. They’re just
not a kind of reasoning.

HOW TO WIN AN ARGUMENT
The social intuitionist model o ers an explanation of why moral and
political arguments are so frustrating: because moral reasons are the
tail wagged by the intuitive dog. A dog’s tail wags to communicate.
You can’t make a dog happy by forcibly wagging its tail. And you
can’t change people’s minds by utterly refuting their arguments.
Hume diagnosed the problem long ago:
And as reasoning is not the source, whence either
disputant derives his tenets; it is in vain to expect, that
any logic, which speaks not to the a ections, will ever
engage him to embrace sounder principles.49
If you want to change people’s minds, you’ve got to talk to their
elephants. You’ve got to use links 3 and 4 of the social intuitionist
model to elicit new intuitions, not new rationales.
Dale Carnegie was one of the greatest elephant-whisperers of all
time. In his classic book How to Win Friends and In uence People,
Carnegie repeatedly urged readers to avoid direct confrontations.
Instead he advised people to “begin in a friendly way,” to “smile,”
to “be a good listener,” and to “never say ‘you’re wrong.’ ” The
persuader’s goal should be to convey respect, warmth, and an
openness to dialogue before stating one’s own case. Carnegie was
urging readers to use link 3, the social persuasion link, to prepare
the ground before attempting to use link 4, the reasoned persuasion
link.
From my description of Carnegie so far, you might think his
techniques are super cial and manipulative, appropriate only for
salespeople. But Carnegie was in fact a brilliant moral psychologist
who grasped one of the deepest truths about con ict. He used a
quotation from Henry Ford to express it: “If there is any one secret
of success it lies in the ability to get the other person’s point of view
and see things from their angle as well as your own.”50
It’s such an obvious point, yet few of us apply it in moral and
political arguments because our righteous minds so readily shift into

combat mode. The rider and the elephant work together smoothly
to fend o attacks and lob rhetorical grenades of our own. The
performance may impress our friends and show allies that we are
committed members of the team, but no matter how good our logic,
it’s not going to change the minds of our opponents if they are in
combat mode too. If you really want to change someone’s mind on
a moral or political matter, you’ll need to see things from that
person’s angle as well as your own. And if you do truly see it the
other person’s way—deeply and intuitively—you might even nd
your own mind opening in response. Empathy is an antidote to
righteousness, although it’s very di cult to empathize across a
moral divide.
IN SUM
People reason and people have moral intuitions (including moral
emotions), but what is the relationship among these processes?
Plato believed that reason could and should be the master; Je erson
believed that the two processes were equal partners (head and
heart) ruling a divided empire; Hume believed that reason was (and
was only t to be) the servant of the passions. In this chapter I tried
to show that Hume was right:
• The mind is divided into parts, like a rider (controlled
processes) on an elephant (automatic processes). The
rider evolved to serve the elephant.

• You can see the rider serving the elephant when people
are morally dumbfounded. They have strong gut feelings
about what is right and wrong, and they struggle to
construct post hoc justi cations for those feelings. Even
when the servant (reasoning) comes back empty-handed,
the master (intuition) doesn’t change his judgment.
• The social intuitionist model starts with Hume’s model
and makes it more social. Moral reasoning is part of our
lifelong struggle to win friends and in uence people.

That’s why I say that “intuitions come rst, strategic
reasoning second.” You’ll misunderstand moral reasoning
if you think about it as something people do by
themselves in order to gure out the truth.

• Therefore, if you want to change someone’s mind about a
moral or political issue, talk to the elephant rst. If you
ask people to believe something that violates their
intuitions, they will devote their e orts to nding an
escape hatch—a reason to doubt your argument or
conclusion. They will almost always succeed.
I have tried to use intuitionism while writing this book. My goal
is to change the way a diverse group of readers—liberal and
conservative, secular and religious—think about morality, politics,
religion, and each other. I knew that I had to take things slowly and
address myself more to elephants than to riders. I couldn’t just lay
out the theory in chapter 1 and then ask readers to reserve
judgment until I had presented all of the supporting evidence.
Rather, I decided to weave together the history of moral psychology
and my own personal story to create a sense of movement from
rationalism to intuitionism. I threw in historical anecdotes,
quotations from the ancients, and praise of a few visionaries. I set
up metaphors (such as the rider and the elephant) that will recur
throughout the book. I did these things in order to “tune up” your
intuitions about moral psychology. If I have failed and you have a
visceral dislike of intuitionism or of me, then no amount of
evidence I could present will convince you that intuitionism is
correct. But if you now feel an intuitive sense that intuitionism
might be true, then let’s keep going. In the next two chapters I’ll
address myself more to riders than to elephants.

