THREE

Elephants Rule

On February 3, 2007, shortly before lunch, I discovered that I was a
chronic liar. I was at home, writing a review article on moral
psychology, when my wife, Jayne, walked by my desk. In passing,
she asked me not to leave dirty dishes on the counter where she
prepared our baby’s food. Her request was polite but its tone added
a postscript: “As I have asked you a hundred times before.”
My mouth started moving before hers had stopped. Words came
out. Those words linked themselves up to say something about the
baby having woken up at the same time that our elderly dog barked
to ask for a walk and I’m sorry but I just put my breakfast dishes
down wherever I could. In my family, caring for a hungry baby and
an incontinent dog is a sure re excuse, so I was acquitted.
Jayne left the room and I continued working. I was writing about
the three basic principles of moral psychology.1 The rst principle is
Intuitions come rst, strategic reasoning second. That’s a six-word
summary of the social intuitionist model.2 To illustrate the
principle, I described a study I did with Thalia Wheatley, who is
now a professor at Dartmouth College.3 Back when Thalia was a
grad student at UVA, she had learned how to hypnotize people, and
she came up with a clever way to test the social intuitionist model.
Thalia hypnotized people to feel a ash of disgust whenever they
saw a certain word (take for half of the subjects; often for the
others).4 While they were still in a trance Thalia instructed them
that they would not be able to remember anything she had told
them, and then she brought them out of the trance.
Once they were fully awake, we asked them to ll out a
questionnaire packet in which they had to judge six short stories

about moral violations. For each story, half of the subjects read a
version that had their hypnotic code word embedded in it. For
example, one story was about a congressman who claims to ght
corruption, yet “takes bribes from the tobacco lobby.” The other
subjects read a version that was identical except for a few words
(the congressman is “often bribed by the tobacco lobby”). On
average, subjects judged each of the six stories to be more
disgusting and morally wrong when their code word was embedded
in the story. That supported the social intuitionist model. By giving
people a little arti cial ash of negativity while they were reading
the story, without giving them any new information, we made their
moral judgments more severe.
The real surprise, though, came with a seventh story we tacked
on almost as an afterthought, a story that contained no moral
violation of any kind. It was about a student council president
named Dan who is in charge of scheduling discussions between
students and faculty. Half of our subjects read that Dan “tries to
take topics that appeal to both professors and students in order to
stimulate discussion.” The other half read the same story except that
Dan “often picks topics” that appeal to professors and students. We
added this story to demonstrate that there is a limit to the power of
intuition. We predicted that subjects who felt a ash of disgust
while reading this story would have to overrule their gut feelings.
To condemn Dan would be bizarre.
Most of our subjects did indeed say that Dan’s actions were ne.
But a third of the subjects who had found their code word in the
story still followed their gut feelings and condemned Dan. They said
that what he did was wrong, sometimes very wrong. Fortunately,
we had asked everyone to write a sentence or two explaining their
judgments, and we found gems such as “Dan is a popularity-seeking
snob” and “I don’t know, it just seems like he’s up to something.”
These subjects made up absurd reasons to justify judgments that
they had made on the basis of gut feelings—feelings Thalia had
implanted with hypnosis.
So there I was at my desk, writing about how people
automatically fabricate justi cations of their gut feelings, when

suddenly I realized that I had just done the same thing with my
wife. I disliked being criticized, and I had felt a ash of negativity
by the time Jayne had gotten to her third word (“Can you not …”).
Even before I knew why she was criticizing me, I knew I disagreed
with her (because intuitions come rst). The instant I knew the
content of the criticism (“… leave dirty dishes on the …”), my inner
lawyer went to work searching for an excuse (strategic reasoning
second). It’s true that I had eaten breakfast, given Max his rst
bottle, and let Andy out for his rst walk, but these events had all
happened at separate times. Only when my wife criticized me did I
merge them into a composite image of a harried father with too few
hands, and I created this fabrication by the time she had completed
her one-sentence criticism (“… counter where I make baby food?”). I
then lied so quickly and convincingly that my wife and I both
believed me.
I had long teased my wife for altering stories to make them more
dramatic when she told them to friends, but it took twenty years of
studying moral psychology to see that I altered my stories too. I
nally understood—not just cerebrally but intuitively and with an
open heart—the admonitions of sages from so many eras and
cultures warning us about self-righteousness. I’ve already quoted
Jesus (on seeing “the speck in your neighbor’s eye”). Here’s the
same idea from Buddha:
It is easy to see the faults of others, but di cult to see
one’s own faults. One shows the faults of others like
cha winnowed in the wind, but one conceals one’s own
faults as a cunning gambler conceals his dice.5
Jesus and Buddha were right, and in this chapter and the next one
I’ll show you how our automatic self-righteousness works. It begins
with rapid and compelling intuitions (that’s link 1 in the social
intuitionist model), and it continues on with post hoc reasoning,
done for socially strategic purposes (links 2 and 3). Here are six
major research ndings that collectively illustrate the rst half of
the rst principle: Intuitions Come First. (In the next chapter I’ll give

evidence for the second half—Strategic Reasoning Second). Elephants
rule, although they are sometimes open to persuasion by riders.
1. BRAINS EVALUATE INSTANTLY AND CONSTANTLY
Brains evaluate everything in terms of potential threat or bene t to
the self, and then adjust behavior to get more of the good stu and
less of the bad.6 Animal brains make such appraisals thousands of
times a day with no need for conscious reasoning, all in order to
optimize the brain’s answer to the fundamental question of animal
life: Approach or avoid?
In the 1890s Wilhelm Wundt, the founder of experimental
psychology, formulated the doctrine of “a ective primacy.”7 A ect
refers to small ashes of positive or negative feeling that prepare us
to approach or avoid something. Every emotion (such as happiness
or disgust) includes an a ective reaction, but most of our a ective
reactions are too eeting to be called emotions (for example, the
subtle feelings you get just from reading the words happiness and
disgust).
Wundt said that a ective reactions are so tightly integrated with
perception that we nd ourselves liking or disliking something the
instant we notice it, sometimes even before we know what it is.8
These ashes occur so rapidly that they precede all other thoughts
about the thing we’re looking at. You can feel a ective primacy in
action the next time you run into someone you haven’t seen in
many years. You’ll usually know within a second or two whether
you liked or disliked the person, but it can take much longer to
remember who the person is or how you know each other.
In 1980 social psychologist Robert Zajonc (the name rhymes with
“science”) revived Wundt’s long-forgotten notion of a ective
primacy. Zajonc was fed up with the common view among
psychologists at the time that people are cool, rational information
processors who rst perceive and categorize objects and then react
to them. He did a number of ingenious experiments that asked
people to rate arbitrary things such as Japanese pictograms, words

in a made-up language, and geometric shapes. It may seem odd to
ask people to rate how much they like foreign words and
meaningless squiggles, but people can do it because almost
everything we look at triggers a tiny ash of a ect. More important,
Zajonc was able to make people like any word or image more just
by showing it to them several times.9 The brain tags familiar things
as good things. Zajonc called this the “mere exposure e ect,” and it
is a basic principle of advertising.
In a landmark article, Zajonc urged psychologists to use a dualprocess model in which a ect or “feeling” is the rst process.10 It
has primacy both because it happens rst (it is part of perception
and is therefore extremely fast) and because it is more powerful (it
is closely linked to motivation, and therefore it strongly in uences
behavior). The second process—thinking—is an evolutionarily
newer ability, rooted in language and not closely related to
motivation. In other words, thinking is the rider; a ect is the
elephant. The thinking system is not equipped to lead—it simply
doesn’t have the power to make things happen—but it can be a
useful advisor.
Zajonc said that thinking could work independently of feeling in
theory, but in practice a ective reactions are so fast and compelling
that they act like blinders on a horse: they “reduce the universe of
alternatives” available to later thinking.11 The rider is an attentive
servant, always trying to anticipate the elephant’s next move. If the
elephant leans even slightly to the left, as though preparing to take
a step, the rider looks to the left and starts preparing to assist the
elephant on its imminent leftward journey. The rider loses interest
in everything o to the right.
2. SOCIAL AND POLITICAL JUDGMENTS ARE PARTICULARLY
INTUITIVE
Here are four pairs of words. Your job is to look only at the second
word in each pair and then categorize it as good or bad:

ower–happiness
hate–sunshine
love–cancer
cockroach–lonely
It’s absurdly easy, but imagine if I asked you to do it on a computer,
where I can ash the rst word in each pair for 250 milliseconds (a
quarter of a second, just long enough to read it) and then I
immediately display the second word. In that case we’d nd that it
takes you longer to make your value judgment for sunshine and
cancer than for happiness and lonely.
This e ect is called “a ective priming” because the rst word
triggers a ash of a ect that primes the mind to go one way or the
other.12 It’s like getting the elephant to lean slightly to the right or
the left, in anticipation of walking to the right or the left. The ash
kicks in within 200 milliseconds, and it lasts for about a second
beyond that if there’s no other jolt to back it up.13 If you see the
second word within that brief window of time, and if the second
word has the same valence, then you’ll be able to respond extra
quickly because your mind is already leaning that way. But if the
rst word primes your mind for a negative evaluation (hate) and I
then show you a positive word (sunshine), it’ll take you about 250
milliseconds longer to respond because you have to undo the lean
toward negativity.
So far this is just a con rmation of Zajonc’s theory about the
speed and ubiquity of a ect, but a big payo came when social
psychologists began using social groups as primes. Would it a ect
your response speed if I used photographs of black people and white
people as the primes? As long as you’re not prejudiced, it won’t
a ect your reaction times. But if you do prejudge people implicitly
(i.e., automatically and unconsciously), then those prejudgments
include a ective ashes, and those ashes will change your reaction
times.
The most widely used measure of these implicit attitudes is the
Implicit Association Test (IAT), developed by Tony Greenwald,
Mahzarin Banaji, and my UVA colleague Brian Nosek.14 You can

take the IAT yourself at ProjectImplicit.org. But be forewarned: it
can be disturbing. You can actually feel yourself moving more
slowly when you are asked to associate good things with the faces
of one race rather than another. You can watch as your implicit
attitude contradicts your explicit values. Most people turn out to
have negative implicit associations with many social groups, such as
black people, immigrants, obese people, and the elderly.
And if the elephant tends to lean away from groups such as the
elderly (whom few would condemn morally), then we should
certainly expect some leaning (prejudging) when people think about
their political enemies. To look for such e ects, my UVA colleague
Jamie Morris measured the brain waves of liberals and
conservatives as they read politically loaded words.15 He replaced
the words ower and hate in the above example with words such as
Clinton, Bush, ag, taxes, welfare, and pro-life. When partisans read
these words, followed immediately by words that everyone agrees
are good (sunshine) or bad (cancer), their brains sometimes revealed
a con ict. Pro-life and sunshine were a ectively incongruous for
liberals, just as Clinton and sunshine were for conservatives. The
words pro and life are both positive on their own, but part of what it
means to be a partisan is that you have acquired the right set of
intuitive reactions to hundreds of words and phrases. Your elephant
knows which way to lean in response to terms such as pro-life, and
as your elephant sways back and forth throughout the day, you nd
yourself liking and trusting the people around you who sway in
sync with you.
The intuitive nature of political judgments is even more striking
in the work of Alex Todorov, at Princeton. Todorov studies how we
form impressions of people. When he began his work, there was
already a lot of research showing that we judge attractive people to
be smarter and more virtuous, and we are more likely to give a
pretty face the bene t of any doubt.16 Juries are more likely to
acquit attractive defendants, and when beautiful people are
convicted, judges give them lighter sentences, on average.17 That’s
normal a ective primacy making everyone lean toward the

defendant, which tips o their riders to interpret the evidence in a
way that will support the elephant’s desire to acquit.
But Todorov found that there was more going on than just
attractiveness. He collected photographs of the winners and
runners-up in hundreds of elections for the U.S. Senate and the
House of Representatives. He showed people the pairs of
photographs from each contest with no information about political
party, and he asked them to pick which person seemed more
competent. He found that the candidate that people judged more
competent was the one who actually won the race about two-thirds
of the time.18 People’s snap judgments of the candidates’ physical
attractiveness and overall likability were not as good predictors of
victory, so these competence judgments were not just based on an
overall feeling of positivity. We can have multiple intuitions arising
simultaneously, each one processing a di erent kind of information.
And strangely, when Todorov forced people to make their
competence judgments after ashing the pair of pictures on the
screen for just a tenth of a second—not long enough to let their eyes
xate on each image—their snap judgments of competence
predicted the real outcomes just as well.19 Whatever the brain is
doing, it’s doing it instantly, just like when you look at the MullerLyer illusion.
The bottom line is that human minds, like animal minds, are
constantly reacting intuitively to everything they perceive, and
basing their responses on those reactions. Within the rst second of
seeing, hearing, or meeting another person, the elephant has
already begun to lean toward or away, and that lean in uences
what you think and do next. Intuitions come rst.20
3. OUR BODIES GUIDE OUR JUDGMENTS
One way to reach the elephant is through its trunk. The olfactory
nerve carries signals about odors to the insular cortex (the insula), a
region along the bottom surface of the frontal part of the brain. This
part of the brain used to be known as the “gustatory cortex”

because in all mammals it processes information from the nose and
the tongue. It helps guide the animal toward the right foods and
away from the wrong ones. But in humans, this ancient foodprocessing center has taken on new duties, and it now guides our
taste in people. It gets more active when we see something morally
shy, particularly something disgusting, as well as garden-variety
unfairness.21 If we had some sort of tiny electrode that could be
threaded up through people’s noses and into their insulas, we could
then control their elephants, making them steer away from
whatever they were viewing at the moment when we pressed the
button. We’ve got such an electrode. It’s called fart spray.
Alex Jordan, a grad student at Stanford, came up with the idea of
asking people to make moral judgments while he secretly tripped
their disgust alarms. He stood at a pedestrian intersection on the
Stanford campus and asked passersby to ll out a short survey. It
asked people to make judgments about four controversial issues,
such as marriage between rst cousins, or a lm studio’s decision to
release a documentary with a director who had tricked some people
into being interviewed.
Alex stood right next to a trash can he had emptied. Before he
recruited each subject, he put a new plastic liner into the metal can.
Before half of the people walked up (and before they could see
him), he sprayed the fart spray twice into the bag, which
“perfumed” the whole intersection for a few minutes. Before other
recruitments, he left the empty bag unsprayed.
Sure enough, people made harsher judgments when they were
breathing in foul air.22 Other researchers have found the same e ect
by asking subjects to ll out questionnaires after drinking bitter
versus sweet drinks.23 As my UVA colleague Jerry Clore puts it, we
use “a ect as information.”24 When we’re trying to decide what we
think about something, we look inward, at how we’re feeling. If I’m
feeling good, I must like it, and if I’m feeling anything unpleasant,
that must mean I don’t like it.
You don’t even need to trigger feelings of disgust to get these
e ects. Simply washing your hands will do it. Chenbo Zhong at the
University of Toronto has shown that subjects who are asked to

wash their hands with soap before lling out questionnaires become
more moralistic about issues related to moral purity (such as
pornography and drug use).25 Once you’re clean, you want to keep
dirty things far away.
Zhong has also shown the reverse process: immorality makes
people want to get clean. People who are asked to recall their own
moral transgressions, or merely to copy by hand an account of
someone else’s moral transgression, nd themselves thinking about
cleanliness more often, and wanting more strongly to cleanse
themselves.26 They are more likely to select hand wipes and other
cleaning products when given a choice of consumer products to take
home with them after the experiment. Zhong calls this the Macbeth
e ect, named for Lady Macbeth’s obsession with water and
cleansing after she goads her husband into murdering King Duncan.
(She goes from “A little water clears us of this deed” to “Out,
damn’d spot! out, I say!”)
In other words, there’s a two-way street between our bodies and
our righteous minds. Immorality makes us feel physically dirty, and
cleansing ourselves can sometimes make us more concerned about
guarding our moral purity. In one of the most bizarre
demonstrations of this e ect, Eric Helzer and David Pizarro asked
students at Cornell University to ll out surveys about their political
attitudes while standing near (or far from) a hand sanitizer
dispenser. Those told to stand near the sanitizer became temporarily
more conservative.27
Moral judgment is not a purely cerebral a air in which we weigh
concerns about harm, rights, and justice. It’s a kind of rapid,
automatic process more akin to the judgments animals make as they
move through the world, feeling themselves drawn toward or away
from various things. Moral judgment is mostly done by the
elephant.
4. PSYCHOPATHS REASON BUT DON’T FEEL

Roughly one in a hundred men (and many fewer women) are
psychopaths. Most are not violent, but the ones who are commit
nearly half of the most serious crimes, such as serial murder, serial
rape, and the killing of police o cers.28 Robert Hare, a leading
researcher, de nes psychopathy by two sets of features. There’s the
unusual stu that psychopaths do—impulsive antisocial behavior,
beginning in childhood—and there are the moral emotions that
psychopaths lack. They feel no compassion, guilt, shame, or even
embarrassment, which makes it easy for them to lie, and to hurt
family, friends, and animals.
Psychopaths do have some emotions. When Hare asked one man if
he ever felt his heart pound or stomach churn, he responded: “Of
course! I’m not a robot. I really get pumped up when I have sex or
when I get into a ght.”29 But psychopaths don’t show emotions
that indicate that they care about other people. Psychopaths seem to
live in a world of objects, some of which happen to walk around on
two legs. One psychopath told Hare about a murder he committed
while burglarizing an elderly man’s home:
I was rummaging around when this old geezer comes
down stairs and … uh … he starts yelling and having a
fucking t … so I pop him one in the, uh, head and he
still doesn’t shut up. So I give him a chop to the throat
and he … like … staggers back and falls on the oor.
He’s gurgling and making sounds like a stuck pig!
[laughs] and he’s really getting on my fucking nerves so
I … uh … boot him a few times in the head. That shut
him up … I’m pretty tired by now so I grab a few beers
from the fridge and turn on the TV and fall asleep. The
cops woke me up [laughs].30
The ability to reason combined with a lack of moral emotions is
dangerous. Psychopaths learn to say whatever gets them what they
want. The serial killer Ted Bundy, for example, was a psychology
major in college, where he volunteered on a crisis hotline. On those
phone calls he learned how to speak to women and gain their trust.

Then he raped, mutilated, and murdered at least thirty young
women before being captured in 1978.
Psychopathy does not appear to be caused by poor mothering or
early trauma, or to have any other nurture-based explanation. It’s a
genetically heritable condition31 that creates brains that are
unmoved by the needs, su ering, or dignity of others.32 The
elephant doesn’t respond with the slightest lean to the gravest
injustice. The rider is perfectly normal—he does strategic reasoning
quite well. But the rider’s job is to serve the elephant, not to act as
a moral compass.
5. BABIES FEEL BUT DON’T REASON
Psychologists used to assume that infant minds were blank slates.
The world babies enter is “one great blooming, buzzing confusion,”
as William James put it,33 and they spend the next few years trying
to make sense of it all. But when developmental psychologists
invented ways to look into infant minds, they found a great deal of
writing already on that slate.
The trick was to see what surprises babies. Infants as young as
two months old will look longer at an event that surprises them
than at an event they were expecting. If everything is a buzzing
confusion, then everything should be equally surprising. But if the
infant’s mind comes already wired to interpret events in certain
ways, then infants can be surprised when the world violates their
expectations.
Using this trick, psychologists discovered that infants are born
with some knowledge of physics and mechanics: they expect that
objects will move according to Newton’s laws of motion, and they
get startled when psychologists show them scenes that should be
physically impossible (such as a toy car seeming to pass through a
solid object). Psychologists know this because infants stare longer at
impossible scenes than at similar but less magical scenes (seeing the
toy car pass just behind the solid object).34 Babies seem to have

some innate ability to process events in their physical world—the
world of objects.
But when psychologists dug deeper, they found that infants come
equipped with innate abilities to understand their social world as
well. They understand things like harming and helping.35 Yale
psychologists Kiley Hamlin, Karen Wynn, and Paul Bloom put on
puppet shows for six- and ten-month-old infants in which a
“climber” (a wooden shape with eyes glued to it) struggled to climb
up a hill. Sometimes a second puppet came along and helped the
climber from below. Other times, a di erent puppet appeared at the
top of the hill and repeatedly bashed the climber down the slope.
A few minutes later, the infants saw a new puppet show. This
time the climber looked back and forth between the helper puppet
and the hinderer puppet, and then it decided to cozy up to the
hinderer. To the infants, that was the social equivalent of seeing a
car pass through a solid box; it made no sense, and the infants
stared longer than when the climber decided to cozy up to the
helper.36
At the end of the experiment, the helper and hinderer puppets
were placed on a tray in front of the infants. The infants were much
more likely to reach out for the helper. If the infants weren’t
parsing their social world, they wouldn’t have cared which puppet
they picked up. But they clearly wanted the nice puppet. The
researchers concluded that “the capacity to evaluate individuals on
the basis of their social interactions is universal and unlearned.”37
It makes sense that infants can easily learn who is nice to them.
Puppies can do that too. But these ndings suggest that by six
months of age, infants are watching how people behave toward
other people, and they are developing a preference for those who are
nice rather than those who are mean. In other words, the elephant
begins making something like moral judgments during infancy, long
before language and reasoning arrive.
Looking at the discoveries from infants and psychopaths at the
same time, it’s clear that moral intuitions emerge very early and are
necessary for moral development.38 The ability to reason emerges

much later, and when moral reasoning is not accompanied by moral
intuition, the results are ugly.
6. AFFECTIVE REACTIONS ARE IN THE RIGHT PLACE AT THE
RIGHT TIME IN THE BRAIN
Damasio’s studies of brain-damaged patients show that the
emotional areas of the brain are the right places to be looking for
the foundations of morality, because losing them interferes with
moral competence. The case would be even stronger if these areas
were active at the right times. Do they become more active just
before someone makes a moral judgment or decision?
In 1999, Joshua Greene, who was then a graduate student in
philosophy at Princeton, teamed up with leading neuroscientist
Jonathan Cohen to see what actually happens in the brain as people
make moral judgments. He studied moral dilemmas in which two
major ethical principles seem to push against each other. For
example, you’ve probably heard of the famous “trolley dilemma,”39
in which the only way you can stop a runaway trolley from killing
ve people is by pushing one person o a bridge onto the track
below.
Philosophers have long disagreed about whether it’s acceptable to
harm one person in order to help or save several people.
Utilitarianism is the philosophical school that says you should
always aim to bring about the greatest total good, even if a few
people get hurt along the way, so if there’s really no other way to
save those ve lives, go ahead and push. Other philosophers believe
that we have duties to respect the rights of individuals, and we must
not harm people in our pursuit of other goals, even moral goals
such as saving lives. This view is known as deontology (from the
Greek root that gives us our word duty). Deontologists talk about
high moral principles derived and justi ed by careful reasoning;
they would never agree that these principles are merely post hoc
rationalizations of gut feelings. But Greene had a hunch that gut
feelings were what often drove people to make deontological

judgments, whereas utilitarian judgments were more cool and
calculating.
To test his hunch, Greene wrote twenty stories that, like the
trolley story, involved direct personal harm, usually done for a
good reason. For example, should you throw an injured person out
of a lifeboat to keep the boat from sinking and drowning the other
passengers? All of these stories were written to produce a strong
negative a ective ash.
Greene also wrote twenty stories involving impersonal harm, such
as a version of the trolley dilemma in which you save the ve
people by ipping a switch that diverts the trolley onto a side track,
where it will kill just one person. It’s the same objective trade-o of
one life for ve, so some philosophers say that the two cases are
morally equivalent, but from an intuitionist perspective, there’s a
world of di erence.40 Without that initial ash of horror (that barehanded push), the subject is free to examine both options and
choose the one that saves the most lives.
Greene brought eighteen subjects into an fMRI scanner and
presented each of his stories on the screen, one at a time. Each
person had to press one of two buttons to indicate whether or not it
was appropriate for a person to take the course of action described
—for example, to push the man or throw the switch.
The results were clear and compelling. When people read stories
involving personal harm, they showed greater activity in several
regions of the brain related to emotional processing. Across many
stories, the relative strength of these emotional reactions predicted
the average moral judgment.
Greene published this now famous study in 2001 in the journal
Science.41 Since then, many other labs have put people into fMRI
scanners and asked them to look at photographs about moral
violations, make charitable donations, assign punishments for
crimes, or play games with cheaters and cooperators.42 With few
exceptions, the results tell a consistent story: the areas of the brain
involved in emotional processing activate almost immediately, and
high activity in these areas correlates with the kinds of moral
judgments or decisions that people ultimately make.43

In an article titled “The Secret Joke of Kant’s Soul,” Greene
summed up what he and many others had found.44 Greene did not
know what E. O. Wilson had said about philosophers consulting
their “emotive centers” when he wrote the article, but his
conclusion was the same as Wilson’s:
We have strong feelings that tell us in clear and
uncertain terms that some things simply cannot be done
and that other things simply must be done. But it’s not
obvious how to make sense of these feelings, and so we,
with the help of some especially creative philosophers,
make up a rationally appealing story [about rights].
This is a stunning example of consilience. Wilson had prophesied
in 1975 that ethics would soon be “biologicized” and refounded as
the interpretation of the activity of the “emotive centers” of the
brain. When he made that prophecy he was going against the
dominant views of his time. Psychologists such as Kohlberg said
that the action in ethics was in reasoning, not emotion. And the
political climate was harsh for people such as Wilson who dared to
suggest that evolutionary thinking was a valid way to examine
human behavior.
Yet in the thirty-three years between the Wilson and Greene
quotes, everything changed. Scientists in many
elds began
recognizing the power and intelligence of automatic processes,
including emotion.45 Evolutionary psychology became respectable,
not in all academic departments but at least among the
interdisciplinary community of scholars that now studies morality.46
In the last few years, the “new synthesis” that Wilson predicted
back in 1975 has arrived.
ELEPHANTS ARE SOMETIMES OPEN TO REASON
I have argued that the Humean model (reason is a servant) ts the
facts better than the Platonic model (reason could and should rule)

or the Je ersonian model (head and heart are co-emperors). But
when Hume said that reason is the “slave” of the passions, I think
he went too far.
A slave is never supposed to question his master, but most of us
can think of times when we questioned and revised our rst
intuitive judgment. The rider-and-elephant metaphor works well
here. The rider evolved to serve the elephant, but it’s a digni ed
partnership, more like a lawyer serving a client than a slave serving
a master. Good lawyers do what they can to help their clients, but
they sometimes refuse to go along with requests. Perhaps the
request is impossible (such as nding a reason to condemn Dan, the
student council president—at least for most of the people in my
hypnosis experiment). Perhaps the request is self-destructive (as
when the elephant wants a third piece of cake, and the rider refuses
to go along and nd an excuse). The elephant is far more powerful
than the rider, but it is not an absolute dictator.
When does the elephant listen to reason? The main way that we
change our minds on moral issues is by interacting with other
people. We are terrible at seeking evidence that challenges our own
beliefs, but other people do us this favor, just as we are quite good
at nding errors in other people’s beliefs. When discussions are
hostile, the odds of change are slight. The elephant leans away from
the opponent, and the rider works frantically to rebut the
opponent’s charges.
But if there is a ection, admiration, or a desire to please the
other person, then the elephant leans toward that person and the
rider tries to nd the truth in the other person’s arguments. The
elephant may not often change its direction in response to
objections from its own rider, but it is easily steered by the mere
presence of friendly elephants (that’s the social persuasion link in
the social intuitionist model) or by good arguments given to it by
the riders of those friendly elephants (that’s the reasoned persuasion
link).
There are even times when we change our minds on our own,
with no help from other people. Sometimes we have con icting
intuitions about something, as many people do about abortion and

other controversial issues. Depending on which victim, which
argument, or which friend you are thinking about at a given
moment, your judgment may ip back and forth as if you were
looking at a Necker cube ( gure 3.1).

3.1. A Necker cube, which your visual system can read in two
con icting ways, although not at the same time. Similarly, some moral
dilemmas can be read by your righteous mind in two con icting
ways, but it’s hard to feel both intuitions at the same time.
FIGURE

And nally, it is possible for people simply to reason their way to
a moral conclusion that contradicts their initial intuitive judgment,
although I believe this process is rare. I know of only one study that
has demonstrated this overruling experimentally, and its ndings
are revealing.
Joe Paxton and Josh Greene asked Harvard students to judge the
story about Julie and Mark that I told you in chapter 2.47 They
supplied half of the subjects with a really bad argument to justify
consensual incest (“If Julie and Mark make love, then there is more
love in the world”). They gave the other half a stronger supporting
argument (about how the aversion to incest is really caused by an
ancient evolutionary adaptation for avoiding birth defects in a
world without contraception, but because Julie and Mark use
contraception, that concern is not relevant). You’d think that
Harvard students would be more persuaded by a good reason than a
bad reason, but it made no di erence. The elephant leaned as soon
as subjects heard the story. The rider then found a way to rebut the

argument (good or bad), and subjects condemned the story equally
in both cases.
But Paxton and Greene added a twist to the experiment: some
subjects were not allowed to respond right away. The computer
forced them to wait for two minutes before they could declare their
judgment about Julie and Mark. For these subjects the elephant
leaned, but quick a ective ashes don’t last for two minutes. While
the subject was sitting there staring at the screen, the lean
diminished and the rider had the time and freedom to think about
the supporting argument. People who were forced to re ect on the
weak argument still ended up condemning Julie and Mark—slightly
more than people who got to answer immediately. But people who
were forced to re ect on the good argument for two minutes
actually did become substantially more tolerant toward Julie and
Mark’s decision to have sex. The delay allowed the rider to think for
himself and to decide upon a judgment that for many subjects was
contrary to the elephant’s initial inclination.
In other words, under normal circumstances the rider takes its cue
from the elephant, just as a lawyer takes instructions from a client.
But if you force the two to sit around and chat for a few minutes,
the elephant actually opens up to advice from the rider and
arguments from outside sources. Intuitions come rst, and under
normal circumstances they cause us to engage in socially strategic
reasoning, but there are ways to make the relationship more of a
two-way street.
IN SUM
The rst principle of moral psychology is Intuitions come rst,
strategic reasoning second. In support of this principle, I reviewed six
areas of experimental research demonstrating that:
• Brains evaluate instantly and constantly (as Wundt and
Zajonc said).

• Social and political judgments depend heavily on quick
intuitive ashes (as Todorov and work with the IAT have
shown).

• Our bodily states sometimes in uence our moral
judgments. Bad smells and tastes can make people more
judgmental (as can anything that makes people think
about purity and cleanliness).
• Psychopaths reason but don’t feel (and are severely
de cient morally).
• Babies feel but don’t reason (and have the beginnings of
morality).

• A ective reactions are in the right place at the right time
in the brain (as shown by Damasio, Greene, and a wave
of more recent studies).
Putting all six together gives us a pretty clear portrait of the rider
and the elephant, and the roles they play in our righteous minds.
The elephant (automatic processes) is where most of the action is in
moral psychology. Reasoning matters, of course, particularly
between people, and particularly when reasons trigger new
intuitions. Elephants rule, but they are neither dumb nor despotic.
Intuitions can be shaped by reasoning, especially when reasons are
embedded in a friendly conversation or an emotionally compelling
novel, movie, or news story.48
But the bottom line is that when we see or hear about the things
other people do, the elephant begins to lean immediately. The rider,
who is always trying to anticipate the elephant’s next move, begins
looking around for a way to support such a move. When my wife
reprimanded me for leaving dirty dishes on the counter, I honestly
believed that I was innocent. I sent my reasoning forth to defend
me and it came back with an e ective legal brief in just three
seconds. It’s only because I happened—at that very moment—to be
writing about the nature of moral reasoning that I bothered to look
closely at my lawyer’s arguments and found them to be historical
ctions, based only loosely on real events.

Why do we have this weird mental architecture? As hominid
brains tripled in size over the last 5 million years, developing
language and a vastly improved ability to reason, why did we
evolve an inner lawyer, rather than an inner judge or scientist?
Wouldn’t it have been most adaptive for our ancestors to gure out
the truth, the real truth about who did what and why, rather than
using all that brainpower just to nd evidence in support of what
they wanted to believe? That depends on which you think was more
important for our ancestors’ survival: truth or reputation.

