FIVE

Beyond WEIRD Morality

I got my Ph.D. at McDonald’s. Part of it, anyway, given the hours I
spent standing outside of a McDonald’s restaurant in West
Philadelphia trying to recruit working-class adults to talk with me
for my dissertation research. When someone agreed, we’d sit down
together at the restaurant’s outdoor seating area, and I’d ask them
what they thought about the family that ate its dog, the woman
who used her ag as a rag, and all the rest. I got some odd looks as
the interviews progressed, and also plenty of laughter—particularly
when I told people about the guy and the chicken. I was expecting
that, because I had written the stories to surprise and even shock
people.
But what I didn’t expect was that these working-class subjects
would sometimes nd my request for justi cations so perplexing.
Each time someone said that the people in a story had done
something wrong, I asked, “Can you tell me why that was wrong?”
When I had interviewed college students on the Penn campus a
month earlier, this question brought forth their moral justi cations
quite smoothly. But a few blocks west, this same question often led
to long pauses and disbelieving stares. Those pauses and stares
seemed to say, You mean you don’t know why it’s wrong to do that to
a chicken? I have to explain this to you? What planet are you from?
These subjects were right to wonder about me because I really
was weird. I came from a strange and di erent moral world—the
University of Pennsylvania. Penn students were the most unusual of
all twelve groups in my study. They were unique in their
unwavering devotion to the “harm principle,” which John Stuart
Mill had put forth in 1859: “The only purpose for which power can

be rightfully exercised over any member of a civilized community,
against his will, is to prevent harm to others.”1 As one Penn student
said: “It’s his chicken, he’s eating it, nobody is getting hurt.”
The Penn students were just as likely as people in the other
eleven groups to say that it would bother them to witness the taboo
violations, but they were the only group that frequently ignored
their own feelings of disgust and said that an action that bothered
them was nonetheless morally permissible. And they were the only
group in which a majority (73 percent) were able to tolerate the
chicken story. As one Penn student said, “It’s perverted, but if it’s
done in private, it’s his right.”
I and my fellow Penn students were weird in a second way too. In
2010, the cultural psychologists Joe Henrich, Steve Heine, and Ara
Norenzayan published a profoundly important article titled “The
Weirdest People in the World?”2 The authors pointed out that
nearly all research in psychology is conducted on a very small
subset of the human population: people from cultures that are
Western, educated, industrialized, rich, and democratic (forming the
acronym WEIRD). They then reviewed dozens of studies showing
that WEIRD people are statistical outliers; they are the least typical,
least representative people you could study if you want to make
generalizations about human nature. Even within the West,
Americans are more extreme outliers than Europeans, and within
the United States, the educated upper middle class (like my Penn
sample) is the most unusual of all.
Several of the peculiarities of WEIRD culture can be captured in
this simple generalization: The WEIRDer you are, the more you see a
world full of separate objects, rather than relationships. It has long been
reported that Westerners have a more independent and autonomous
concept of the self than do East Asians.3 For example, when asked
to write twenty statements beginning with the words “I am …,”
Americans are likely to list their own internal psychological
characteristics (happy, outgoing, interested in jazz), whereas East
Asians are more likely to list their roles and relationships (a son, a
husband, an employee of Fujitsu).

The di erences run deep; even visual perception is a ected. In
what’s known as the framed-line task, you are shown a square with
a line drawn inside it. You then turn the page and see an empty
square that is larger or smaller than the original square. Your task is
to draw a line that is the same as the line you saw on the previous
page, either in absolute terms (same number of centimeters; ignore
the new frame) or in relative terms (same proportion relative to the
frame). Westerners, and particularly Americans, excel at the
absolute task, because they saw the line as an independent object in
the rst place and stored it separately in memory. East Asians, in
contrast, outperform Americans at the relative task, because they
automatically perceived and remembered the relationship among
the parts.4
Related to this di erence in perception is a di erence in thinking
style. Most people think holistically (seeing the whole context and
the relationships among parts), but WEIRD people think more
analytically (detaching the focal object from its context, assigning it
to a category, and then assuming that what’s true about the
category is true about the object).5 Putting this all together, it
makes sense that WEIRD philosophers since Kant and Mill have
mostly generated moral systems that are individualistic, rule-based,
and universalist. That’s the morality you need to govern a society of
autonomous individuals.
But when holistic thinkers in a non-WEIRD culture write about
morality, we get something more like the Analects of Confucius, a
collection of aphorisms and anecdotes that can’t be reduced to a
single rule.6 Confucius talks about a variety of relationship-speci c
duties and virtues (such as lial piety and the proper treatment of
one’s subordinates).
If WEIRD and non-WEIRD people think di erently and see the
world di erently, then it stands to reason that they’d have di erent
moral concerns. If you see a world full of individuals, then you’ll
want the morality of Kohlberg and Turiel—a morality that protects
those individuals and their individual rights. You’ll emphasize
concerns about harm and fairness.

But if you live in a non-WEIRD society in which people are more
likely to see relationships, contexts, groups, and institutions, then
you won’t be so focused on protecting individuals. You’ll have a
more sociocentric morality, which means (as Shweder described it
back in chapter 1) that you place the needs of groups and
institutions rst, often ahead of the needs of individuals. If you do
that, then a morality based on concerns about harm and fairness
won’t be su cient. You’ll have additional concerns, and you’ll need
additional virtues to bind people together.
Part II of this book is about those additional concerns and virtues.
It’s about the second principle of moral psychology: There’s more to
morality than harm and fairness. I’m going to try to convince you that
this principle is true descriptively—that is, as a portrait of the
moralities we see when we look around the world. I’ll set aside the
question of whether any of these alternative moralities are really
good, true, or justi able. As an intuitionist, I believe it is a mistake
to even raise that emotionally powerful question until we’ve calmed
our elephants and cultivated some understanding of what such
moralities are trying to accomplish. It’s just too easy for our riders
to build a case against every morality, political party, and religion
that we don’t like.7 So let’s try to understand moral diversity rst,
before we judge other moralities.
THREE ETHICS ARE MORE DESCRIPTIVE THAN ONE
The University of Chicago is proud of its ranking by Playboy
magazine as the “worst party school” in the United States. Winters
are long and brutal, bookstores outnumber bars, and students wear
T-shirts showing the university crest above phrases such as “Where
Fun Goes to Die” and “Hell Does Freeze Over.” I arrived at the
university on a September evening in 1992, unpacked my rental
truck, and went out for a beer. At the table next to mine, there was
a heated argument. A bearded man slammed his hands on the table
and shouted, “Damn it, I’m talking about Marx!”

This was Richard Shweder’s culture. I had been granted a
fellowship to work with Shweder for two years after I nished my
Ph.D. at Penn. Shweder was the leading thinker in cultural
psychology—a new discipline that combined the anthropologist’s
love of context and variability with the psychologist’s interest in
mental processes.8 A dictum of cultural psychology is that “culture
and psyche make each other up.”9 In other words, you can’t study
the mind while ignoring culture, as psychologists usually do,
because minds function only once they’ve been lled out by a
particular culture. And you can’t study culture while ignoring
psychology, as anthropologists usually do, because social practices
and institutions (such as initiation rites, witchcraft, and religion) are
to some extent shaped by concepts and desires rooted deep within
the human mind, which explains why they often take similar forms
on di erent continents.
I was particularly drawn to a new theory of morality Shweder
had developed based on his research in Orissa (which I described in
chapter 1). After he published that study, he and his colleagues
continued to analyze the six hundred interview transcripts they had
collected. They found three major clusters of moral themes, which
they called the ethics of autonomy, community, and divinity.10 Each
one is based on a di erent idea about what a person really is.
The ethic of autonomy is based on the idea that people are, rst
and foremost, autonomous individuals with wants, needs, and
preferences. People should be free to satisfy these wants, needs, and
preferences as they see t, and so societies develop moral concepts
such as rights, liberty, and justice, which allow people to coexist
peacefully without interfering too much in each other’s projects.
This is the dominant ethic in individualistic societies. You nd it in
the writings of utilitarians such as John Stuart Mill and Peter
Singer11 (who value justice and rights only to the extent that they
increase human welfare), and you nd it in the writings of
deontologists such as Kant and Kohlberg (who prize justice and
rights even in cases where doing so may reduce overall welfare).
But as soon as you step outside of Western secular society, you
hear people talking in two additional moral languages. The ethic of

community is based on the idea that people are, rst and foremost,
members of larger entities such as families, teams, armies,
companies, tribes, and nations. These larger entities are more than
the sum of the people who compose them; they are real, they
matter, and they must be protected. People have an obligation to
play their assigned roles in these entities. Many societies therefore
develop moral concepts such as duty, hierarchy, respect, reputation,
and patriotism. In such societies, the Western insistence that people
should design their own lives and pursue their own goals seems
sel sh and dangerous—a sure way to weaken the social fabric and
destroy the institutions and collective entities upon which everyone
depends.
The ethic of divinity is based on the idea that people are, rst and
foremost, temporary vessels within which a divine soul has been
implanted.12 People are not just animals with an extra serving of
consciousness; they are children of God and should behave
accordingly. The body is a temple, not a playground. Even if it does
no harm and violates nobody’s rights when a man has sex with a
chicken carcass, he still shouldn’t do it because it degrades him,
dishonors his creator, and violates the sacred order of the universe.
Many societies therefore develop moral concepts such as sanctity
and sin, purity and pollution, elevation and degradation. In such
societies, the personal liberty of secular Western nations looks like
libertinism, hedonism, and a celebration of humanity’s baser
instincts.13
I rst read about Shweder’s three ethics in 1991, after I had
collected my data in Brazil but before I had written my dissertation.
I realized that all of my best stories—the ones that got people to
react emotionally without being able to nd a victim—involved
either disrespect, which violated the ethics of community (for
example, using a ag as a rag), or disgust and carnality, which
violated the ethics of divinity (for example, the thing with the
chicken).
I used Shweder’s theory to analyze the justi cations people gave
(when I asked them “Can you tell me why?”), and it worked like
magic. The Penn students spoke almost exclusively in the language

of the ethic of autonomy, whereas the other groups (particularly the
working-class groups) made much more use of the ethic of
community, and a bit more use of the ethic of divinity.14
Soon after I arrived in Chicago, I applied for a Fulbright
fellowship to spend three months in India, where I hoped to get a
closer look at the ethic of divinity. (It had been the rarest of the
three ethics in my dissertation data.) Because I was able to draw on
Shweder’s extensive network of friends and colleagues in
Bhubaneswar, the capital city of Orissa, it was easy for me to put
together a detailed research proposal, which was funded. After
spending a year in Chicago reading cultural psychology and learning
from Shweder and his students, I ew o to India in September
1993.
HOW I BECAME A PLURALIST
I was extraordinarily well hosted and well treated. I was given the
use of a lovely apartment, which came with its own full-time cook
and servant.15 For $5 a day I rented a car and driver. I was
welcomed at the local university by Professor Biranchi Puhan, an
old friend of Shweder’s, who gave me an o ce and introduced me
to the rest of the psychology department, from which I recruited a
research team of eager students. Within a week I was ready to
begin my work, which was supposed to be a series of experiments
on moral judgment, particularly violations of the ethics of divinity.
But these experiments taught me little in comparison to what I
learned just from stumbling around the complex social web of a
small Indian city and then talking with my hosts and advisors about
my confusion.
One cause of confusion was that I had brought with me two
incompatible identities. On one hand, I was a twenty-nine-year-old
liberal atheist with very de nite views about right and wrong. On
the other hand, I wanted to be like those open-minded
anthropologists I had read so much about and had studied with,
such as Alan Fiske and Richard Shweder. My rst few weeks in

Bhubaneswar were therefore lled with feelings of shock and
dissonance. I dined with men whose wives silently served us and
then retreated to the kitchen, not speaking to me the entire
evening. I was told to be stricter with my servants, and to stop
thanking them for serving me. I watched people bathe in and cook
with visibly polluted water that was held to be sacred. In short, I
was immersed in a sex-segregated, hierarchically strati ed,
devoutly religious society, and I was committed to understanding it
on its own terms, not on mine.
It only took a few weeks for my dissonance to disappear, not
because I was a natural anthropologist but because the normal
human capacity for empathy kicked in. I liked these people who
were hosting me, helping me, and teaching me. Wherever I went,
people were kind to me. And when you’re grateful to people, it’s
easier to adopt their perspective. My elephant leaned toward them,
which made my rider search for moral arguments in their defense.
Rather than automatically rejecting the men as sexist oppressors and
pitying the women, children, and servants as helpless victims, I
began to see a moral world in which families, not individuals, are
the basic unit of society, and the members of each extended family
(including its servants) are intensely interdependent. In this world,
equality and personal autonomy were not sacred values. Honoring
elders, gods, and guests, protecting subordinates, and ful lling one’s
role-based duties were more important.
I had read about Shweder’s ethic of community and had
understood it intellectually. But now, for the rst time in my life, I
began to feel it. I could see beauty in a moral code that emphasizes
duty, respect for one’s elders, service to the group, and negation of
the self’s desires. I could still see its ugly side: I could see that
power sometimes leads to pomposity and abuse. And I could see
that subordinates—particularly women—were often blocked from
doing what they wanted to do by the whims of their elders (male
and female). But for the rst time in my life, I was able to step
outside of my home morality, the ethic of autonomy. I had a place
to stand, and from the vantage point of the ethic of community, the
ethic of autonomy now seemed overly individualistic and self-

focused. In my three months in India I met very few Americans. But
when I boarded the plane to y back to Chicago I heard a loud
voice with an unmistakably American accent saying, “Look, you tell
him that this is the compartment over my seat, and I have a right to
use it.” I cringed.
The same thing happened with the ethic of divinity. I understood
intellectually what it meant to treat the body as a temple rather
than as a playground, but that was an analytical concept I used to
make sense of people who were radically di erent from me. I
personally was quite fond of pleasure and could see little reason to
choose less of it rather than more. And I was quite devoted to
e ciency, so I could see little reason to spend an hour or two each
day saying prayers and performing rituals. But there I was in
Bhubaneswar, interviewing Hindu priests, monks, and laypeople
about their concepts of purity and pollution and trying to
understand why Hindus place so much emphasis on bathing, food
choices, and concerns about what or whom a person has touched.
Why do Hindu gods care about the state of their devotees’ bodies?
(And it’s not just Hindu gods; the Koran and the Hebrew Bible
reveal similar concerns, and many Christians believe that
“cleanliness is next to godliness.”)16
In graduate school I had done some research on moral disgust,
and that prepared me to think about these questions. I had teamed
up with Paul Rozin (one of the leading experts on the psychology of
food and eating) and Clark McCauley (a social psychologist at
nearby Bryn Mawr College). We wanted to know why the emotion
of disgust—which clearly originated as an emotion that keeps us
away from dirty and contaminating things—can now be triggered
by some moral violations (such as betrayal or child abuse) but not
by others (such as robbing a bank or cheating on one’s taxes).17
Our theory, in brief, was that the human mind automatically
perceives a kind of vertical dimension of social space, running from
God or moral perfection at the top down through angels, humans,
other animals, monsters, demons, and then the devil, or perfect evil,
at the bottom.18 The list of supernatural beings varies from culture
to culture, and you don’t nd this vertical dimension elaborated in

every culture. But you do nd the idea that high = good = pure =
God whereas low = bad = dirty = animal quite widely. So widely,
in fact, that it seems to be a kind of archetype (if you like Jungian
terminology) or innately prepared idea (if you prefer the language
of evolutionary psychology).
Our idea was that moral disgust is felt whenever we see or hear
about people whose behavior shows them to be low on this vertical
dimension. People feel degraded when they think about such things,
just as they feel elevated by hearing about virtuous actions.19 A man
who robs a bank does a bad thing, and we want to see him
punished. But a man who betrays his own parents or who enslaves
children for the sex trade seems monstrous—lacking in some basic
human sentiment. Such actions revolt us and seem to trigger some
of the same physiology of disgust as would seeing rats scampering
out of a trash can.20
That was our theory, and it was rather easy to nd evidence for it
in India. Hindu notions of reincarnation could not be more explicit:
Our souls reincarnate into higher or lower creatures in the next life,
based on the virtue of our conduct during this life. But as with the
ethic of community, the big surprise for me was that after a few
months I began to feel the ethic of divinity in subtle ways.
Some of these feelings were related to the physical facts of dirt
and cleanliness in Bhubaneswar. Cows and dogs roamed freely
around town, so you had to step carefully around their droppings;
you sometimes saw people defecating by the roadside; and garbage
was often heaped into y-swarmed piles. It therefore began to feel
natural to me to adopt the Indian practice of removing my shoes
when I entered any private home, creating a sharp boundary
between dirty and clean spaces. As I visited temples I became
attuned to their spiritual topography: the courtyard is higher (more
pure) than the street; the antechamber of the temple higher still,
and the inner sanctum, where the god was housed, could be entered
only by the Brahmin priest, who had followed all the necessary
rules of personal purity. Private homes had a similar topography,
and I had to be sure never to enter the kitchen or the room where
o erings were made to deities. The topography of purity even

applies to your own body: you eat with your right hand (after
washing it), and you use your left hand to clean yourself (with
water) after defecation, so you develop an intuitive sense that left
= dirty and right = clean. It becomes second nature that you don’t
give things to others using your left hand.
If these new feelings were just a new ability to detect invisible
dirt rays emanating from objects, they would have helped me to
understand obsessive-compulsive disorder, but not morality. These
feelings were more than that. In the ethic of divinity, there is an
order to the universe, and things (as well as people) should be
treated with the reverence or disgust that they deserve. When I
returned to Chicago, I began to feel positive essences emanating
from some objects. It felt right to me to treat certain books with
reverence—not leaving them on the oor or taking them into the
bathroom. Funeral services and even burial (which had previously
seemed to me to be such a waste of money and space) began to
make more emotional sense. The human body does not suddenly
become an object, like that of any other animal corpse, at the
moment of death. There are right ways and wrong ways of treating
bodies, even when there is no conscious being inside the body to
experience mistreatment.
I also began to understand why the American culture wars
involved so many battles over sacrilege. Is a ag just a piece of
cloth, which can be burned as a form of protest? Or does each ag
contain within it something nonmaterial such that when protesters
burn it, they have done something bad (even if nobody were to see
them do it)? When an artist submerges a cruci x in a jar of his own
urine, or smears elephant dung on an image of the Virgin Mary, do
these works belong in art museums?21 Can the artist simply tell
religious Christians, “If you don’t want to see it, don’t go to the
museum”? Or does the mere existence of such works make the
world dirtier, more profane, and more degraded?
If you can’t see anything wrong here, try reversing the politics.
Imagine that a conservative artist had created these works using
images of Martin Luther King Jr. and Nelson Mandela instead of
Jesus and Mary. Imagine that his intent was to mock the quasi-

dei cation by the left of so many black leaders. Could such works
be displayed in museums in New York or Paris without triggering
angry demonstrations? Might some on the left feel that the museum
itself had been polluted by racism, even after the paintings were
removed?22
As with the ethic of community, I had read about the ethic of
divinity before going to India, and had understood it intellectually.
But in India, and in the years after I returned, I felt it. I could see
beauty in a moral code that emphasized self-control, resistance to
temptation, cultivation of one’s higher, nobler self, and negation of
the self’s desires. I could see the dark side of this ethic too: once
you allow visceral feelings of disgust to guide your conception of
what God wants, then minorities who trigger even a hint of disgust
in the majority (such as homosexuals or obese people) can be
ostracized and treated cruelly. The ethic of divinity is sometimes
incompatible with compassion, egalitarianism, and basic human
rights.23
But at the same time, it o ers a valuable perspective from which
we can understand and critique some of the ugly parts of secular
societies. For example, why are many of us bothered by rampant
materialism? If some people want to work hard in order to earn
money in order to buy luxury goods in order to impress others, how
can we criticize them using the ethic of autonomy?
To o er another example, I was recently eating lunch at a UVA
dining hall. At the table next to me two young women were talking.
One of them was very grateful for something the other had agreed
to do for her. To express her gratitude she exclaimed, “Oh my God!
If you were a guy, I’d be so on your dick right now!” I felt a
mixture of amusement and revulsion, but how could I criticize her
from within the ethic of autonomy?
The ethic of divinity lets us give voice to inchoate feelings of
elevation and degradation—our sense of “higher” and “lower.” It
gives us a way to condemn crass consumerism and mindless or
trivialized sexuality. We can understand long-standing laments
about the spiritual emptiness of a consumer society in which
everyone’s mission is to satisfy their personal desires.24

STEPPING OUT OF THE MATRIX
Among the most profound ideas that have arisen around the world
and across eras is that the world we experience is an illusion, akin
to a dream. Enlightenment is a form of waking up. You nd this
idea in many religions and philosophies,25 and it’s also a staple of
science ction, particularly since William Gibson’s 1984 novel
Neuromancer. Gibson coined the term cyberspace and described it as
a “matrix” that emerges when a billion computers are connected
and people get enmeshed in “a consensual hallucination.”
The creators of the movie The Matrix developed Gibson’s idea into
a gorgeous and frightening visual experience. In one of its most
famous scenes, the protagonist, Neo, is given a choice. He can take
a red pill, which will disconnect him from the matrix, dissolve the
hallucination, and give him command of his actual, physical body
(which is lying in a vat of goo). Or he can take a blue pill, forget he
was ever given this choice, and his consciousness will return to the
rather pleasant hallucination in which nearly all human beings
spend their conscious existence. Neo swallows the red pill, and the
matrix dissolves around him.
It wasn’t quite as dramatic for me, but Shweder’s writings were
my red pill. I began to see that many moral matrices coexist within
each nation. Each matrix provides a complete, uni ed, and
emotionally compelling worldview, easily justi ed by observable
evidence and nearly impregnable to attack by arguments from
outsiders.
I grew up Jewish in the suburbs of New York City. My grandparents
had ed czarist Russia and found work in New York’s garment
industry. For their generation, socialism and labor unions were
e ective responses to the exploitation and terrible working
conditions they faced. Franklin Roosevelt was the heroic leader who
protected workers and defeated Hitler. Jews ever since have been
among the most reliable voters for the Democratic Party.26

My morality wasn’t just shaped by my family and ethnicity. I
attended Yale University, which was ranked at the time as the
second most liberal of the Ivy League schools. It was not uncommon
during class discussions for teachers and students to make jokes and
critical comments about Ronald Reagan, the Republican Party, or
the conservative position on controversial current events. Being
liberal was cool; being liberal was righteous. Yale students in the
1980s strongly supported the victims of apartheid, the people of El
Salvador, the government of Nicaragua, the environment, and Yale’s
own striking labor unions, which deprived us all of dining halls for
much of my senior year.
Liberalism seemed so obviously ethical. Liberals marched for
peace, workers’ rights, civil rights, and secularism. The Republican
Party was (as we saw it) the party of war, big business, racism, and
evangelical Christianity. I could not understand how any thinking
person would voluntarily embrace the party of evil, and so I and my
fellow liberals looked for psychological explanations of
conservatism, but not liberalism. We supported liberal policies
because we saw the world clearly and wanted to help people, but
they supported conservative policies out of pure self-interest (lower
my taxes!) or thinly veiled racism (stop funding welfare programs
for minorities!). We never considered the possibility that there were
alternative moral worlds in which reducing harm (by helping
victims) and increasing fairness (by pursuing group-based equality)
were not the main goals.27 And if we could not imagine other
moralities, then we could not believe that conservatives were as
sincere in their moral beliefs as we were in ours.
When I moved from Yale to Penn, and then from Penn to the
University of Chicago, the matrix stayed pretty much the same. It
was only in India that I had to stand alone. Had I been there as a
tourist it would have been easy to maintain my matrix membership
for three months; I’d have met up now and then with other Western
tourists, and we would have swapped stories about the sexism,
poverty, and oppression we had seen. But because I was there to
study cultural psychology I did everything I could to t into another

matrix, one woven mostly from the ethics of community and
divinity.
When I returned to America, social conservatives no longer
seemed so crazy. I could listen to leaders of the “religious right”
such as Jerry Falwell and Pat Robertson with a kind of clinical
detachment. They want more prayer and spanking in schools, and
less sex education and access to abortion? I didn’t think those steps
would reduce AIDS and teen pregnancy, but I could see why
Christian conservatives wanted to “thicken up” the moral climate of
schools and discourage the view that children should be as free as
possible to act on their desires. Social conservatives think that
welfare programs and feminism increase rates of single motherhood
and weaken the traditional social structures that compel men to
support their own children? Well, now that I was no longer on the
defensive, I could see that those arguments made sense, even if
there are also many good e ects of liberating women from
dependence on men. I had escaped from my prior partisan mind-set
(reject rst, ask rhetorical questions later) and began to think about
liberal and conservative policies as manifestations of deeply
con icting but equally heartfelt visions of the good society.28
It felt good to be released from partisan anger. And once I was no
longer angry, I was no longer committed to reaching the conclusion
that righteous anger demands: we are right, they are wrong. I was
able to explore new moral matrices, each one supported by its own
intellectual traditions. It felt like a kind of awakening.
In 1991, Shweder wrote about the power of cultural psychology
to cause such awakenings:
Yet the conceptions held by others are available to us, in
the sense that when we truly understand their
conception of things we come to recognize possibilities
latent within our own rationality … and those ways of
conceiving of things become salient for us for the rst
time, or once again. In other words, there is no
homogeneous “backcloth” to our world. We are multiple
from the start.29

I cannot overstate the importance of this quotation for moral and
political psychology. We are multiple from the start. Our minds
have the potential to become righteous about many di erent
concerns, and only a few of these concerns are activated during
childhood. Other potential concerns are left undeveloped and
unconnected to the web of shared meanings and values that become
our adult moral matrix. If you grow up in a WEIRD society, you
become so well educated in the ethic of autonomy that you can
detect oppression and inequality even where the apparent victims
see nothing wrong. But years later, when you travel, or become a
parent, or perhaps just read a good novel about a traditional
society, you might nd some other moral intuitions latent within
yourself. You might nd yourself responding to dilemmas involving
authority, sexuality, or the human body in ways that are hard to
explain.
Conversely, if you are raised in a more traditional society, or
within an evangelical Christian household in the United States, you
become so well educated in the ethics of community and divinity
that you can detect disrespect and degradation even where the
apparent victims see nothing wrong. But if you then face
discrimination yourself (as conservatives and Christians sometimes
do in the academic world),30 or if you simply listen to Martin
Luther King Jr.’s “I Have a Dream” speech, you may nd a new
resonance in moral arguments about oppression and equality.
IN SUM
The second principle of moral psychology is: There’s more to morality
than harm and fairness. In support of this claim I described research
showing that people who grow up in Western, educated, industrial,
rich, and democratic (WEIRD) societies are statistical outliers on
many psychological measures, including measures of moral
psychology. I also showed that:

• The WEIRDer you are, the more you perceive a world full
of separate objects, rather than relationships.

• Moral pluralism is true descriptively. As a simple matter of
anthropological fact, the moral domain varies across
cultures.

• The moral domain is unusually narrow in WEIRD
cultures, where it is largely limited to the ethic of
autonomy (i.e., moral concerns about individuals
harming, oppressing, or cheating other individuals). It is
broader—including the ethics of community and divinity
—in most other societies, and within religious and
conservative moral matrices within WEIRD societies.
• Moral matrices bind people together and blind them to
the coherence, or even existence, of other matrices. This
makes it very di cult for people to consider the
possibility that there might really be more than one form
of moral truth, or more than one valid framework for
judging people or running a society.

In the next three chapters I’ll catalogue the moral intuitions,
showing exactly what else there is beyond harm and fairness. I’ll
show how a small set of innate and universal moral foundations can
be used to construct a great variety of moral matrices. I’ll o er
tools you can use to understand moral arguments emanating from
matrices that are not your own.

