SIX

Taste Buds of the Righteous Mind

A few years ago I tried a restaurant called The True Taste. The
interior was entirely white. Each table was set only with spoons—
ve small spoons at each place setting. I sat down at a table and
looked at the menu. It was divided into sections labeled “Sugars,”
“Honeys,” “Tree Saps,” and “Arti cials.” I called the waiter over
and asked him to explain. Did they not serve food?
The waiter, it turned out, was also the owner and sole employee
of the restaurant. He told me that the restaurant was the rst of its
kind in the world: it was a tasting bar for sweeteners. I could
sample sweeteners from thirty-two countries. He explained that he
was a biologist who specialized in the sense of taste. He described
to me the ve kinds of taste receptor found in each taste bud on the
tongue—sweet, sour, salty, bitter, and savory (also called umami).
He said that in his research he had discovered that activation of the
sweet receptor produced the strongest surge of dopamine in the
brain, which indicated to him that humans are hard-wired to seek
sweetness above the other four tastes. He therefore reasoned that it
was most e cient, in terms of units of pleasure per calorie, to
consume sweeteners, and he conceived the idea of opening a
restaurant aimed entirely at stimulating this one taste receptor. I
asked him how business was going. “Terrible,” he said, “but at least
I’m doing better than the chemist down the street who opened a
salt-tasting bar.”
OK, this didn’t really happen to me, but it’s a metaphor for how I
feel sometimes when I read books about moral philosophy and
psychology. Morality is so rich and complex, so multifaceted and
internally contradictory. Pluralists such as Shweder rise to the

challenge, o ering theories that can explain moral diversity within
and across cultures. Yet many authors reduce morality to a single
principle, usually some variant of welfare maximization (basically,
help people, don’t hurt them).1 Or sometimes it’s justice or related
notions of fairness, rights, or respect for individuals and their
autonomy.2 There’s The Utilitarian Grill, serving only sweeteners
(welfare), and The Deontological Diner, serving only salts (rights).
Those are your options.
Neither Shweder nor I am saying that “anything goes,” or that all
societies or all cuisines are equally good. But we believe that moral
monism—the attempt to ground all of morality on a single principle
—leads to societies that are unsatisfying to most people and at high
risk of becoming inhumane because they ignore so many other
moral principles.3
We humans all have the same ve taste receptors, but we don’t all
like the same foods. To understand where these di erences come
from, we can start with an evolutionary story about sugary fruits
and fatty animals, which were good food for our common ancestors.
But we’ll also have to examine the history of each culture, and we’ll
have to look at the childhood eating habits of each individual. Just
knowing that everyone has sweetness receptors can’t tell you why
one person prefers Thai food to Mexican, or why hardly anyone
stirs sugar into beer. It takes a lot of additional work to connect the
universal taste receptors to the speci c things that a particular
person eats and drinks.
It’s the same for moral judgments. To understand why people are
so divided by moral issues, we can start with an exploration of our
common evolutionary heritage, but we’ll also have to examine the
history of each culture and the childhood socialization of each
individual within that culture. Just knowing that we all care about
harm can’t tell you why one person prefers hunting to badminton or
why hardly anyone devotes their waking hours primarily to serving
the poor. It will take a lot of additional work for us to connect the

universal moral taste receptors to the speci c moral judgments that
a particular person makes.
The Chinese sage Mencius made the analogy between morality
and food 2,300 years ago when he wrote that “moral principles
please our minds as beef and mutton and pork please our mouths.”4
In this chapter and the next two, I’ll develop the analogy that the
righteous mind is like a tongue with six taste receptors. In this analogy,
morality is like cuisine: it’s a cultural construction, in uenced by
accidents of environment and history, but it’s not so exible that
anything goes. You can’t have a cuisine based on tree bark, nor can
you have one based primarily on bitter tastes. Cuisines vary, but
they all must please tongues equipped with the same ve taste
receptors.5 Moral matrices vary, but they all must please righteous
minds equipped with the same six social receptors.
THE BIRTH OF MORAL SCIENCE
Nowadays, secular people often see the Enlightenment as a battle
between two mortal enemies: on one side was science, with its
principal weapon, reason, and on the other was religion, with its
ancient shield of superstition. Reason defeated superstition, light
replaced darkness. But when David Hume was alive, he was ghting
a three-way battle. Enlightenment thinkers were united in rejecting
divine revelation as the source of moral knowledge, but they were
divided as to whether morality transcended human nature—that is,
it emerged from the very nature of rationality and could therefore
be deduced by reasoning, as Plato believed—or whether morality
was a part of human nature, like language or taste, which had to be
studied by observation.6 Given Hume’s concerns about the limits of
reasoning, he believed that philosophers who tried to reason their
way to moral truth without looking at human nature were no better
than theologians who thought they could nd moral truth revealed
in sacred texts. Both were transcendentalists.7
Hume’s work on morality was the quintessential Enlightenment
project: an exploration of an area previously owned by religion,

using the methods and attitudes of the new natural sciences. His
rst great work, A Treatise of Human Nature, had this subtitle: Being
an Attempt to Introduce the Experimental Method of Reasoning into
Moral Subjects. Hume believed that “moral science” had to begin
with careful inquiry into what humans are really like. And when he
examined human nature—in history, in political a airs, and among
his fellow philosophers—he saw that “sentiment” (intuition) is the
driving force of our moral lives, whereas reasoning is biased and
impotent, t primarily to be a servant of the passions.8 He also saw
a diversity of virtues, and he rejected attempts by some of his
contemporaries to reduce all of morality to a single virtue such as
kindness, or to do away with virtues and replace them with a few
moral laws.
Because he thought that morality was based in a variety of
sentiments, which give us pleasure when we encounter virtue and
displeasure when we encounter vice, Hume often relied upon
sensory analogies, and particularly the taste analogy:
Morality is nothing in the abstract Nature of Things, but
is entirely relative to the Sentiment or mental Taste of
each particular Being; in the same Manner as the
Distinctions of sweet and bitter, hot and cold, arise from
the particular feeling of each Sense or Organ. Moral
Perceptions therefore, ought not to be class’d with the
Operations of the Understanding, but with the Tastes or
Sentiments.9
Moral judgment is a kind of perception, and moral science should
begin with a careful study of the moral taste receptors. You can’t
possibly deduce the list of ve taste receptors by pure reasoning,
nor should you search for it in scripture. There’s nothing
transcendental about them. You’ve got to examine tongues.
Hume got it right. When he died in 1776, he and other
sentimentalists10 had laid a superb foundation for “moral science,”
one that has, in my view, been largely vindicated by modern
research.11 You would think, then, that in the decades after his

death, the moral sciences progressed rapidly. But you would be
wrong. In the decades after Hume’s death the rationalists claimed
victory over religion and took the moral sciences o on a twohundred-year tangent.
ATTACK OF THE SYSTEMIZERS
Autism has bedeviled psychiatric classi ers for decades because it is
not a single, discrete disease. It’s usually described as a “spectrum”
disorder because people can be more or less autistic, and it’s not
clear where to draw the line between those who have a serious
mental illness and those who are just not very good at reading other
people. At the extreme end of the spectrum, autistic people are
“mind-blind.”12 They are missing the social-cognitive software that
the rest of us use to guess the intentions and desires of other people.
According to one of the leading autism researchers, Simon BaronCohen, there are in fact two spectra, two dimensions on which we
can place each person: empathizing and systemizing. Empathizing is
“the drive to identify another person’s emotions and thoughts, and
to respond to these with an appropriate emotion.”13 If you prefer
ction to non ction, or if you often enjoy conversations about
people you don’t know, you are probably above average on
empathizing. Systemizing is “the drive to analyse the variables in a
system, to derive the underlying rules that govern the behaviour of
the system.”14 If you are good at reading maps and instruction
manuals, or if you enjoy guring out how machines work, you are
probably above average on systemizing.
If we cross these two traits, we get a two-dimensional space (see
gure 6.1), and each person can be placed at a particular spot in
that space. Baron-Cohen has shown that autism is what you get
when genes and prenatal factors combine to produce a brain that is
exceptionally low on empathizing and exceptionally high on
systemizing. Autism, including Asperger’s syndrome (a subtype of
high-functioning autism), is better thought of as a region of
personality-space—the lower right corner of the lower right

quadrant—than as a discrete disease.15 The two leading ethical
theories in Western philosophy were founded by men who were as
high as could be on systemizing, and were rather low on
empathizing.

6.1. Two dimensions of cognitive style. People with autism are
very high on systemizing and very low on empathizing. So were
some important moral philosophers. (Adapted from Baron-Cohen
2009.)

FIGURE

BENTHAM AND THE UTILITARIAN GRILL
Jeremy Bentham was born in England in 1748. He went to Oxford
at the age of twelve, trained as a lawyer, and devoted his career to
reforming the mess of contradictory and often pointless rules and
punishments that had accreted over many centuries to constitute
English law. His most important work was titled Introduction to the
Principles of Morals and Legislation. In it he proposed that a single
principle should govern all reforms, all laws, and even all human
actions: the principle of utility, which he de ned as “the principle

which approves or disapproves of every action whatsoever,
according to the tendency which it appears to have to augment or
diminish the happiness of the party whose interest is in question.”16
Each law should aim to maximize the utility of the community,
which is de ned as the simple arithmetic sum of the expected
utilities of each member. Bentham then systematized the parameters
needed to calculate utility, including the intensity, duration, and
certainty of “hedons” (pleasures) and “dolors” (pains). He o ered
an algorithm, the “felici c calculus,” for summing the hedons and
dolors to reach a moral verdict on any action, for any person, in any
country.
Bentham’s philosophy showed an extraordinary degree of
systemizing, and as Baron-Cohen says, systemizing is a strength.
Problems arise, however, when systemizing occurs in the absence of
empathizing. In an article titled “Asperger’s Syndrome and the
Eccentricity and Genius of Jeremy Bentham,” Philip Lucas and Anne
Sheeran collect accounts of Bentham’s personal life and compare
them to the diagnostic criteria for Asperger’s syndrome.17 They nd
a close match on the main diagnostic criteria, including those
involving low empathy and poor social relationships. Bentham had
few friends as a child, and he left a string of angry ex-friends as an
adult. He never married, referred to himself as a hermit, and
seemed to care little about other people. One contemporary said of
him: “He regards the people about him no more than the ies of a
summer.”18
A related criterion is an impaired imaginative capacity,
particularly with respect to the inner lives of other people. In his
philosophy as in his personal behavior, Bentham o ended many of
his contemporaries by his inability to perceive variety and subtlety
in human motives. John Stuart Mill—a decidedly non-autistic
utilitarian—came to despise Bentham. He wrote that Bentham’s
personality disquali ed him as a philosopher because of the
“incompleteness” of his mind:
In many of the most natural and strongest feelings of
human nature he had no sympathy; from many of its

graver experiences he was altogether cut o ; and the
faculty by which one mind understands a mind di erent
from itself, and throws itself into the feelings of that
other mind, was denied him by his de ciency of
Imagination.19
Lucas and Sheeran conclude that had Bentham been alive today,
“it is likely he would have received the diagnosis of Asperger’s
syndrome.”20
KANT AND THE DEONTOLOGICAL DINER
Immanuel Kant was born in Prussia in 1724. He was well
acquainted with Hume’s work and was favorably disposed toward
sentimentalist theories early in his career, particularly when he
wrote about aesthetics and the sublime. But although he granted
that sentiments such as sympathy are crucial for a description of
why people in fact behave morally, he was disturbed by the
subjectivity that such an account implied for ethics. If one person
has di erent moral sentiments from another, does she have di erent
moral obligations? And what if people in one culture have di erent
sentiments from people in another?
Kant, like Plato, wanted to discover the timeless, changeless form
of the Good. He believed that morality had to be the same for all
rational creatures, regardless of their cultural or individual
proclivities. To discover this timeless form, it simply would not do
to use observational methods—to look around the world and see
what virtues people happened to pursue. Rather, he said that moral
law could only be established by the process of a priori (prior to
experience) philosophizing. It had to consist of principles that are
inherent in and revealed through the operation of reason.21 And
Kant found such a principle: noncontradiction. Rather than o ering
a concrete rule with some speci c content, such as “help the poor”
or “honor your parents,” Kant provided an abstract rule from which
(he claimed) all other valid moral rules could be derived. He called

it the categorical (or unconditional) imperative: “Act only according
to that maxim whereby you can at the same time will that it should
become a universal law.”22
Bentham told us to use arithmetic to gure out the right course of
action, but Kant told us to use logic. Both men accomplished
miracles of systemization, boiling all of morality down to a single
sentence, a single formula. Did Kant also have Asperger’s
syndrome?
Like Bentham, Kant was a loner who never married and whose
inner life seems cold. He was famous for his love of routine (he set
out for his afternoon walk at precisely three-thirty every day,
regardless of the weather), and some experts have speculated that
he too had Asperger’s syndrome.23 After reading accounts of Kant’s
personal life, however, I think the case is not as clear as it is for
Bentham. Kant was widely liked, and he did seem to enjoy
company, although some of his socializing had a calculated feel to it
(he valued laughter and companionship because they were good for
his health).24 The safest thing to do is to take advantage of BaronCohen’s two dimensions and say that Kant was one of the most
extraordinary systemizers in human history while being rather low
on empathizing, without joining Bentham at the bottom right corner
of gure 6.1.
GETTING BACK ON TRACK
I do not want to suggest that utilitarianism and Kantian deontology
are incorrect as moral theories just because they were founded by
men who may have had Asperger’s syndrome. That would be an ad
hominem argument, a logical error, and a mean thing to say.
Besides, both utilitarianism and Kantian deontology have been
enormously generative in philosophy and public policy.
But in psychology our goal is descriptive. We want to discover
how the moral mind actually works, not how it ought to work, and
that can’t be done by reasoning, math, or logic. It can be done only
by observation, and observation is usually keener when informed by

empathy.25 However, philosophy began retreating from observation
and empathy in the nineteenth century, placing ever more emphasis
on reasoning and systematic thought. As Western societies became
more educated, industrialized, rich, and democratic, the minds of its
intellectuals changed. They became more analytic and less
holistic.26 Utilitarianism and deontology became far more appealing
to ethicists than Hume’s messy, pluralist, sentimentalist approach.
This trend explains why I found moral psychology so dull when I
rst studied it in graduate school. Kohlberg had embraced Kant’s
rationalism. He created a theory in which moral development had
one and only one end point: a full understanding of justice. This
whole approach felt wrong to me. It was oversystemized and
underempathized. It was The True Taste restaurant, serving up a
one-receptor morality.27
BROADENING THE PALATE
So what else is there beyond harm and fairness? Shweder’s three
ethics o ered a useful starting point, but like most cultural
anthropologists Shweder was wary of evolutionary explanations of
human behavior. The prevailing view among anthropologists had
long been that evolution got our species to the point of becoming
bipedal, tool-using, large-brained creatures, but once we developed
the capacity for culture, biological evolution stopped, or at least
became irrelevant. Culture is so powerful that it can cause humans
to behave in ways that override whatever ancient instincts we share
with other primates.
I was convinced that the prevailing view in anthropology was
wrong, and that it would never be possible to understand morality
without evolution. But Shweder had taught me to be careful about
evolutionary explanations, which are sometimes reductionist
(because they ignore the shared meanings that are the focus of
cultural anthropology) and naively functionalist (because they are
too quick to assume that every behavior evolved to serve a
function). Could I formulate an evolutionary account of moral

intuition that was not reductionist, and that was cautious in its
claims about the “purpose” or “function” of evolved psychological
mechanisms? I couldn’t just point to features of morality that
seemed universal—such as compassion and reciprocity—and assert
that they were innate merely because they were found everywhere.
I had to have a careful evolutionary story for each one, and I had to
be able to say how these innate intuitions interacted with cultural
evolution to produce the variety of moral matrices that now cover
the Earth.
I began by analyzing lists of virtues from around the world.
Virtues are social constructions. The virtues taught to children in a
warrior culture are di erent from those taught in a farming culture
or a modern industrialized culture. There’s always some overlap
among lists, but even then there are di erent shades of meaning.
Buddha, Christ, and Muhammad all talked about compassion, but in
rather di erent ways.28 Nonetheless, when you see that some
version of kindness, fairness, and loyalty is valued in most cultures,
you start wondering if there might be some low-level pan-human
social receptors (analogous to taste receptors) that make it
particularly easy for people to notice some kinds of social events
rather than others.
To put it in terms of the taste analogy: Most cultures have one or
more sweet beverages that are widely consumed—usually derived
from a local fruit, or, in industrialized nations, just from sugar and a
few avorings. It would be silly to posit the existence of separate
receptors for mango juice, apple juice, Coca-Cola, and Fanta.
There’s one main receptor at work here—the sweetness receptor—
and each culture has invented various ways to trigger it.29 If an
anthropologist tells us that an Eskimo tribe has no such beverage, it
would not mean that they lack the sweetness receptor; it would just
show that Eskimo cuisine makes little use of it, for the obvious
reason that Eskimos, until recently, had little access to fruit. And
when primatologists tell us that chimpanzees and bonobos love fruit
and will work hard in a laboratory task to obtain a sip of Coca-Cola,
the case for an innate sweet receptor becomes even stronger.

My goal was to nd links between virtues and well-established
evolutionary theories. I didn’t want to make the classic mistake of
amateur evolutionary theorists, which is to pick a trait and then ask:
“Can I think of a story about how this trait might once have been
adaptive?” The answer to that question is almost always yes
because reasoning can take you wherever you want to go. Anyone
with access to an armchair can sit down and generate what Rudyard
Kipling called “just-so stories”—fantastical accounts of how the
camel got a hump and the elephant got a trunk. My goal, in
contrast, was to identify the most obvious links between two elds I
deeply respected: anthropology and evolutionary psychology.
MORAL FOUNDATIONS THEORY
I teamed up with a friend from my years at the University of
Chicago, Craig Joseph, who had also worked with Shweder. Craig’s
research examined virtue concepts among Muslims in Egypt and the
United States.
We borrowed the idea of “modularity” from the cognitive
anthropologists Dan Sperber and Lawrence Hirschfeld.30 Modules
are like little switches in the brains of all animals. They are
switched on by patterns that were important for survival in a
particular ecological niche, and when they detect that pattern, they
send out a signal that (eventually) changes the animal’s behavior in
a way that is (usually) adaptive. For example, many animals react
with fear the very rst time they see a snake because their brains
include neural circuits that function as snake detectors.31 As Sperber
and Hirschfeld put it:
An evolved cognitive module—for instance a snake
detector, a face-recognition device … is an adaptation to
a range of phenomena that presented problems or
opportunities in the ancestral environment of the
species. Its function is to process a given type of stimuli
or inputs—for instance snakes [or] human faces.

This was a perfect description of what universal moral “taste
receptors” would look like. They would be adaptations to longstanding threats and opportunities in social life. They would draw
people’s attention to certain kinds of events (such as cruelty or
disrespect), and trigger instant intuitive reactions, perhaps even
speci c emotions (such as sympathy or anger).
This approach was just what we needed to account for cultural
learning and variation. Sperber and Hirschfeld distinguished
between the original triggers of a module and its current triggers.32
The original triggers are the set of objects for which the module
was designed33 (that is, the set of all snakes is the original trigger
for a snake-detector module). The current triggers are all the things
in the world that happen to trigger it (including real snakes, as well
as toy snakes, curved sticks, and thick ropes, any of which might
give you a scare if you see them in the grass). Modules make
mistakes, and many animals have evolved tricks to exploit the
mistakes of other animals. For example, the hover y has evolved
yellow and black stripes, making it look like a wasp, which triggers
the wasp-avoidance module in some birds that would otherwise
enjoy eating hover ies.
Cultural variation in morality can be explained in part by noting
that cultures can shrink or expand the current triggers of any
module. For example, in the past fty years people in many
Western societies have come to feel compassion in response to
many more kinds of animal su ering, and they’ve come to feel
disgust in response to many fewer kinds of sexual activity. The
current triggers can change in a single generation, even though it
would take many generations for genetic evolution to alter the
design of the module and its original triggers.
Furthermore, within any given culture, many moral controversies
turn out to involve competing ways to link a behavior to a moral
module. Should parents and teachers be allowed to spank children
for disobedience? On the left side of the political spectrum,
spanking typically triggers judgments of cruelty and oppression. On
the right, it is sometimes linked to judgments about proper
enforcement of rules, particularly rules about respect for parents

and teachers. So even if we all share the same small set of cognitive
modules, we can hook actions up to modules in so many ways that
we can build con icting moral matrices on the same small set of
foundations.
Craig and I tried to identify the best candidates for being the
universal cognitive modules upon which cultures construct moral
matrices. We therefore called our approach Moral Foundations
Theory.34 We created it by identifying the adaptive challenges of
social life that evolutionary psychologists frequently wrote about
and then connecting those challenges to virtues that are found in
some form in many cultures.35

FIGURE

6.2. The ve foundations of morality ( rst draft).

Five adaptive challenges stood out most clearly: caring for
vulnerable children, forming partnerships with non-kin to reap the
bene ts of reciprocity, forming coalitions to compete with other
coalitions, negotiating status hierarchies, and keeping oneself and
one’s kin free from parasites and pathogens, which spread quickly

when people live in close proximity to each other. (I’ll present the
sixth foundation—Liberty/oppression—in chapter 8.)
In gure 6.2 I have drawn a column for each of the ve
foundations we initially proposed.36 The rst row gives the adaptive
challenges. If our ancestors faced these challenges for hundreds of
thousands of years, then natural selection would favor those whose
cognitive modules helped them to get things right—rapidly and
intuitively—compared to those who had to rely upon their general
intelligence (the rider) to solve recurrent problems. The second row
gives the original triggers—that is, the sorts of social patterns that
such a module should detect. (Note that the foundations are really
sets of modules that work together to meet the adaptive
challenge.)37 The third row lists examples of the current triggers—
the sorts of things that do in fact trigger the relevant modules
(sometimes by mistake) for people in a modern Western society.
The fourth row lists some emotions that are part of the output of
each foundation, at least when the foundation is activated very
strongly. The fth row lists some of the virtue words that we use to
talk about people who trigger a particular moral “taste” in our
minds.
I’ll talk about each foundation in more detail in the next chapter.
For now, I just want to demonstrate the theory using the Care/harm
foundation. Imagine that your four-year-old son is taken to the
hospital to have his appendix removed. You are allowed to watch
the procedure from behind a glass window. Your son is given a
general anesthetic and you see him lying, unconscious, on the
operating table. Next, you see the surgeon’s knife puncture his
abdomen. Would you feel a wave of relief, knowing that he is
nally getting an operation that will save his life? Or would you
feel pain so strongly that you’d have to look away? If your “dolors”
(pains) outweigh your “hedons” (pleasures), then your reaction is
irrational, from a utilitarian point of view, but it makes perfect
sense as the output of a module. We respond emotionally to signs of
violence or su ering, particularly when a child is involved,
particularly our own child. We respond even when we know
consciously that it’s not really violence and he’s not really su ering.

It’s like the Muller-Lyer illusion: we can’t help but see one line as
longer, even when we know consciously that they are the same
length.
As you watch the surgery, you notice two nurses assisting in the
operation—one older, one younger. Both are fully attentive to the
procedure, but the older nurse occasionally strokes your son’s head,
as though trying to comfort him. The younger nurse is all business.
Suppose, for the sake of argument, that there was conclusive proof
that patients under deep anesthetic don’t hear or feel anything. If
that were the case, then what should be your reaction to the two
nurses? If you are a utilitarian, you should have no preference. The
older nurse’s actions did nothing to reduce su ering or improve the
surgical outcome. If you are a Kantian, you’d also give the older
nurse no extra credit. She seems to have acted absentmindedly, or
(even worse, for Kant) she acted on her feelings. She did not act out
of commitment to a universalizable principle. But if you are a
Humean, then it is perfectly proper for you to like and praise the
older nurse. She has so fully acquired the virtue of caring that she
does it automatically and e ortlessly, even when it has no e ect.
She is a virtuoso of caring, which is a ne and beautiful thing in a
nurse. It tastes good.
IN SUM
The second principle of moral psychology is: There’s more to morality
than harm and fairness. In this chapter I began to say exactly what
more there is:
• Morality is like taste in many ways—an analogy made
long ago by Hume and Mencius.
•

Deontology and utilitarianism are “one-receptor”
moralities that are likely to appeal most strongly to
people who are high on systemizing and low on
empathizing.

• Hume’s pluralist, sentimentalist, and naturalist approach
to ethics is more promising than utilitarianism or
deontology for modern moral psychology. As a rst step
in resuming Hume’s project, we should try to identify
the taste receptors of the righteous mind.
• Modularity can help us think about innate receptors, and
how they produce a variety of initial perceptions that get
developed in culturally variable ways.
• Five good candidates for being taste receptors of the
righteous mind are care, fairness, loyalty, authority, and
sanctity.

In psychology, theories are cheap. Anyone can invent one.
Progress happens when theories are tested, supported, and
corrected by empirical evidence, especially when a theory proves to
be useful—for example, if it helps people to understand why half of
the people in their country seem to live in a di erent moral
universe. That’s what happened next.

