SEVEN

The Moral Foundations of Politics

Behind every act of altruism, heroism, and human decency you’ll
nd either sel shness or stupidity. That, at least, is the view long
held by many social scientists who accepted the idea that Homo
sapiens is really Homo economicus.1 “Economic man” is a simple
creature who makes all of life’s choices like a shopper in a
supermarket with plenty of time to compare jars of applesauce. If
that’s your view of human nature, then it’s easy to create
mathematical models of behavior because there’s really just one
principle at work: self-interest. People do whatever gets them the
most bene t for the lowest cost.
To see how wrong this view is, answer the ten questions in gure
7.1. Homo economicus would put a price on sticking a needle into
his own arm, and a lower price—perhaps zero—on the other nine
actions, none of which hurts him directly or costs him anything.
More important than the numbers you wrote are the comparisons
between columns. Homo economicus would nd the actions in
column B no more aversive than those in column A. If you found
any of the actions in column B worse than their counterparts in
column A, then congratulations, you are a human being, not an
economist’s fantasy. You have concerns beyond narrow self-interest.
You have a working set of moral foundations.

FIGURE

7.1. What’s your price?

I wrote these ve pairs of actions so that the B column would
give you an intuitive ash from each foundation, like putting a
grain of salt or sugar on your tongue. The ve rows illustrate
violations of Care (hurting a child), Fairness (pro ting from
someone else’s undeserved loss), Loyalty (criticizing your nation to
outsiders), Authority (disrespecting your father), and Sanctity
(acting in a degrading or disgusting way).

In the rest of this chapter I’ll describe these foundations and how
they became part of human nature. I’ll show that these foundations
are used di erently, and to di erent degrees, to support moral
matrices on the political left and right.
A NOTE ON INNATENESS
It used to be risky for a scientist to assert that anything about
human behavior was innate. To back up such claims, you had to
show that the trait was hardwired, unchangeable by experience, and
found in all cultures. With that de nition, not much is innate, aside
from a few infant re exes such as that cute thing they do when you
put one nger into their little hands. If you proposed that anything
more complex than that was innate—particularly a sex di erence—
you’d be told that there was a tribe somewhere on Earth that didn’t
show the trait, so therefore it’s not innate.
We’ve advanced a lot since the 1970s in our understanding of the
brain, and now we know that traits can be innate without being
either hardwired or universal. As the neuroscientist Gary Marcus
explains, “Nature bestows upon the newborn a considerably
complex brain, but one that is best seen as prewired— exible and
subject to change—rather than hardwired, xed, and immutable.”2
To replace wiring diagrams, Marcus suggests a better analogy:
The brain is like a book, the rst draft of which is written by the
genes during fetal development. No chapters are complete at birth,
and some are just rough outlines waiting to be lled in during
childhood. But not a single chapter—be it on sexuality, language,
food preferences, or morality—consists of blank pages on which a
society can inscribe any conceivable set of words. Marcus’s analogy
leads to the best de nition of innateness I have ever seen:
Nature provides a rst draft, which experience then
revises.… “Built-in” does not mean unmalleable; it
means “organized in advance of experience.”3

The list of ve moral foundations was my rst attempt to specify
how the righteous mind was “organized in advance of experience.”
But Moral Foundations Theory also tries to explain how that rst
draft gets revised during childhood to produce the diversity of
moralities that we nd across cultures—and across the political
spectrum.
1. THE CARE/HARM FOUNDATION
Reptiles get a bad rap for being cold—not just cold-blooded but
coldhearted. Some reptile mothers do hang around after their babies
hatch, to provide some protection, but in many species they don’t.
So when the rst mammals began suckling their young, they raised
the cost of motherhood. No longer would females turn out dozens of
babies and bet that a few would survive on their own.
Mammals make fewer bets and invest a lot more in each one, so
mammals face the challenge of caring for and nurturing their
children for a long time. Primate moms place even fewer bets and
invest still more in each one. And human babies, whose brains are
so enormous that a child must be pushed out through the birth canal
a year before he or she can walk, are bets so huge that a woman
can’t even put her chips on the table by herself. She needs help in
the last months of pregnancy, help to deliver the baby, and help to
feed and care for the child for years after the birth. Given this big
wager, there is an enormous adaptive challenge: to care for the
vulnerable and expensive child, keep it safe, keep it alive, keep it
from harm.
It is just not conceivable that the chapter on mothering in the
book of human nature is entirely blank, leaving it for mothers to
learn everything by cultural instruction or trial and error. Mothers
who were innately sensitive to signs of su ering, distress, or
neediness improved their odds, relative to their less sensitive
sisters.

FIGURE

7.2. Baby Gogo, Max, and Gogo.

And it’s not only mothers who need innate knowledge. Given the
number of people who pool their resources to bet on each child,
evolution favored women and (to a lesser extent) men who had an
automatic reaction to signs of need or su ering, such as crying,
from children in their midst (who, in ancient times, were likely to
be kin).4 The su ering of your own children is the original trigger
of one of the key modules of the Care foundation. (I’ll often refer to
foundations using only the rst of their two names—Care rather
than Care/harm.) This module works with other related modules5 to
meet the adaptive challenge of protecting and caring for children.
This is not a just-so story. It is my retelling of the beginning of
attachment theory, a well-supported theory that describes the
system by which mothers and children regulate each other’s
behavior so that the child gets a good mix of protection and
opportunities for independent exploration.6
The set of current triggers for any module is often much larger
than the set of original triggers. The photo in gure 7.2 illustrates
this expansion in four ways. First, you might nd it cute. If you do,
it’s because your mind is automatically responsive to certain
proportions and patterns that distinguish human children from

adults. Cuteness primes us to care, nurture, protect, and interact.7 It
gets the elephant leaning. Second, although this is not your child,
you might still have an instant emotional response because the Care
foundation can be triggered by any child. Third, you might nd my
son’s companions (Gogo and Baby Gogo) cute, even though they are
not real children, because they were designed by a toy company to
trigger your Care foundation. Fourth, Max loves Gogo; he screams
when I accidentally sit on Gogo, and he often says, “I am Gogo’s
mommy,” because his attachment system and Care foundation are
developing normally.

FIGURE

7.3. A current trigger for the Care/harm foundation. (photo credit
7.1)

If your buttons can get pushed by a photo of a child sleeping with
two stu ed monkeys, just imagine how you’d feel if you saw a child
or a cute animal facing the threat of violence, as in gure 7.3.

It makes no evolutionary sense for you to care about what
happens to my son Max, or a hungry child in a faraway country, or
a baby seal. But Darwin doesn’t have to explain why you shed any
particular tear. He just has to explain why you have tear ducts in the
rst place, and why those ducts can sometimes be activated by
su ering that is not your own.8 Darwin must explain the original
triggers of each module. The current triggers can change rapidly.
We care about violence toward many more classes of victims today
than our grandparents did in their time.9
Political parties and interest groups strive to make their concerns
become current triggers of your moral modules. To get your vote,
your money, or your time, they must activate at least one of your
moral foundations.10 For example, gure 7.4 shows two cars I
photographed in Charlottesville. What can you guess about the
drivers’ politics?
Bumper stickers are often tribal badges; they advertise the teams
we support, including sports teams, universities, and rock bands.
The driver of the “Save Darfur” car is announcing that he or she is
on the liberal team. You know that intuitively, but I can give a
more formal reason: The moral matrix of liberals, in America and
elsewhere, rests more heavily on the Care foundation than do the
matrices of conservatives, and this driver has selected three bumper
stickers urging people to protect innocent victims.11 The driver has
no relationship to these victims. The driver is trying to get you to
connect your thinking about Darfur and meat-eating to the
intuitions generated by your Care foundation.
It was harder to nd bumper stickers related to compassion for
conservatives, but the “wounded warrior” car is an example. This
driver is also trying to get you to care, but conservative caring is
somewhat di erent—it is aimed not at animals or at people in other
countries but at those who’ve sacri ced for the group.12 It is not
universalist; it is more local, and blended with loyalty.
2. THE FAIRNESS/CHEATING FOUNDATION

Suppose a coworker o ers to take on your workload for ve days so
that you can add a second week to your Caribbean vacation. How
would you feel? Homo economicus would feel unalloyed pleasure, as
though he had just been given a free bag of groceries. But the rest
of us know that the bag isn’t free. It’s a big favor, and you can’t
repay your coworker by bringing back a bottle of rum. If you accept
her o er, you’re likely to do so while gushing forth expressions of
gratitude, praise for her kindness, and a promise to do the same for
her whenever she goes on vacation.

FIGURE 7.4. Liberal and conservative caring.
Evolutionary theorists often speak of genes as being “sel sh,”
meaning that they can only in uence an animal to do things that
will spread copies of that gene. But one of the most important
insights into the origins of morality is that “sel sh” genes can give
rise to generous creatures, as long as those creatures are selective in
their generosity. Altruism toward kin is not a puzzle at all. Altruism
toward non-kin, on the other hand, has presented one of the
longest-running puzzles in the history of evolutionary thinking.13 A
big step toward its solution came in 1971 when Robert Trivers
published his theory of reciprocal altruism.14
Trivers noted that evolution could create altruists in a species
where individuals could remember their prior interactions with
other individuals and then limit their current niceness to those who
were likely to repay the favor. We humans are obviously just such a
species. Trivers proposed that we evolved a set of moral emotions
that make us play “tit for tat.” We’re usually nice to people when
we rst meet them. But after that we’re selective: we cooperate
with those who have been nice to us, and we shun those who took
advantage of us.
Human life is a series of opportunities for mutually bene cial
cooperation. If we play our cards right, we can work with others to
enlarge the pie that we ultimately share. Hunters work together to
bring down large prey that nobody could catch alone. Neighbors
watch each other’s houses and loan each other tools. Coworkers

cover each other’s shifts. For millions of years, our ancestors faced
the adaptive challenge of reaping these bene ts without getting
suckered. Those whose moral emotions compelled them to play “tit
for tat” reaped more of these bene ts than those who played any
other strategy, such as “help anyone who needs it” (which invites
exploitation), or “take but don’t give” (which can work just once
with each person; pretty soon nobody’s willing to share pie with
you).15 The original triggers of the Fairness modules are acts of
cooperation or sel shness that people show toward us. We feel
pleasure, liking, and friendship when people show signs that they
can be trusted to reciprocate. We feel anger, contempt, and even
sometimes disgust when people try to cheat us or take advantage of
us.16
The current triggers of the Fairness modules include a great many
things that have gotten linked, culturally and politically, to the
dynamics of reciprocity and cheating. On the left, concerns about
equality and social justice are based in part on the Fairness
foundation—wealthy and powerful groups are accused of gaining by
exploiting those at the bottom while not paying their “fair share” of
the tax burden. This is a major theme of the Occupy Wall Street
movement, which I visited in October 2011 (see gure 7.5).17 On
the right, the Tea Party movement is also very concerned about
fairness. They see Democrats as “socialists” who take money from
hardworking Americans and give it to lazy people (including those
who receive welfare or unemployment bene ts) and to illegal
immigrants (in the form of free health care and education).18

FIGURE 7.5. Fairness left and right. Top: Sign at Occupy Wall Street,
Zuccotti Park, New York City. Bottom: Sign at Tea Party rally,
Washington, DC (photo by Emily Ekins). Everyone believes that
taxes should be “fair.” (photo credit 7.2)

Everyone cares about fairness, but there are two major kinds. On
the left, fairness often implies equality, but on the right it means
proportionality—people should be rewarded in proportion to what
they contribute, even if that guarantees unequal outcomes.
3. THE LOYALTY/BETRAYAL FOUNDATION
In the summer of 1954, Muzafar Sherif convinced twenty-two sets
of working-class parents to let him take their twelve-year-old boys
o their hands for three weeks. He brought the boys to a summer
camp he had rented in Robbers Cave State Park, Oklahoma. There
he conducted one of the most famous studies in social psychology,
and one of the richest for understanding the foundations of
morality. Sherif brought the boys to the camp in two groups of
eleven, on two consecutive days, and housed them in di erent parts
of the park. For the rst ve days, each group thought it was alone.
Even still, they set about marking territory and creating tribal
identities.
One group called themselves the “Rattlers,” and the other group
took the name “Eagles.” The Rattlers discovered a good swimming
hole upstream from the main camp and, after an initial swim, they
made a few improvements to the site, such as laying a rock path
down to the water. They then claimed the site as their own, as their
special hideout, which they visited each day. The Rattlers were
disturbed one day to discover paper cups at the site (which in fact
they themselves had left behind); they were angry that “outsiders”
had used their swimming hole.
A leader emerged in each group by consensus. When the boys
were deciding what to do, they all suggested ideas. But when it
came time to choose one of those ideas, the leader usually made the
choice. Norms, songs, rituals, and distinctive identities began to
form in each group (Rattlers are tough and never cry; Eagles never
curse). Even though they were there to have fun, and even though
they believed they were alone in the woods, each group ended up
doing the sorts of things that would have been quite useful if they

were about to face a rival group that claimed the same territory.
Which they were.
On day 6 of the study, Sherif let the Rattlers get close enough to
the baseball eld to hear that other boys—the Eagles—were using
it, even though the Rattlers had claimed it as their eld. The
Rattlers begged the camp counselors to let them challenge the
Eagles to a baseball game. As he had planned to do from the start,
Sherif then arranged a weeklong tournament of sports competitions
and camping skills. From that point forward, Sherif says,
“performance in all activities which might now become competitive
(tent pitching, baseball, etc.) was entered into with more zest and
also with more e ciency.”19 Tribal behavior increased dramatically.
Both sides created ags and hung them in contested territory. They
destroyed each other’s ags, raided and vandalized each other’s
bunks, called each other nasty names, made weapons (socks lled
with rocks), and would often have come to blows had the
counselors not intervened.
We all recognize this portrait of boyhood. The male mind appears
to be innately tribal—that is, structured in advance of experience so
that boys and men enjoy doing the sorts of things that lead to group
cohesion and success in con icts between groups (including
warfare).20 The virtue of loyalty matters a great deal to both sexes,
though the objects of loyalty tend to be teams and coalitions for
boys, in contrast to two-person relationships for girls.21
Despite some claims by anthropologists in the 1970s, human
beings are not the only species that engages in war or kills its own
kind. It now appears that chimpanzees guard their territory, raid the
territory of rivals, and, if they can pull it o , kill the males of the
neighboring group and take their territory and their females.22 And
it now appears that warfare has been a constant feature of human
life since long before agriculture and private property.23 For
millions of years, therefore, our ancestors faced the adaptive
challenge of forming and maintaining coalitions that could fend o
challenges and attacks from rival groups. We are the descendants of
successful tribalists, not their more individualistic cousins.

Many psychological systems contribute to e ective tribalism and
success in inter-group competition. The Loyalty/betrayal foundation
is just a part of our innate preparation for meeting the adaptive
challenge of forming cohesive coalitions. The original trigger for
the Loyalty foundation is anything that tells you who is a team
player and who is a traitor, particularly when your team is ghting
with other teams. But because we love tribalism so much, we seek
out ways to form groups and teams that can compete just for the
fun of competing. Much of the psychology of sports is about
expanding the current triggers of the Loyalty foundation so that
people can have the pleasures of binding themselves together to
pursue harmless trophies. (A trophy is evidence of victory. The urge
to take trophies—including body parts from slain foes—is
widespread in warfare, occurring even during modern times.)24
I can’t be certain that the owner of the car in gure 7.6 is a man,
but I’m fairly con dent that the owner is a Republican based on his
or her choice to decorate the car using only the Loyalty foundation.
The V with crossed swords is the symbol of the UVA sports teams
(the Cavaliers) and the owner chose to pay an extra $20 every year
to have a customized license plate honoring the American ag (“Old
Glory”) and American unity (“United We Stand”).
The love of loyal teammates is matched by a corresponding
hatred of traitors, who are usually considered to be far worse than
enemies. The Koran, for example, is full of warnings about the
duplicity of out-group members, particularly Jews, yet the Koran
does not command Muslims to kill Jews. Far worse than a Jew is an
apostate—a Muslim who has betrayed or simply abandoned the
faith. The Koran commands Muslims to kill apostates, and Allah
himself promises that he “shall certainly roast them at a Fire; as
often as their skins are wholly burned, We shall give them in
exchange other skins, that they may taste the chastisement. Surely
God is All-mighty, All-wise.”25 Similarly, in The Inferno, Dante
reserves the innermost circle of hell—and the most excruciating
su ering—for the crime of treachery. Far worse than lust, gluttony,
violence, or even heresy is the betrayal of one’s family, team, or
nation.

FIGURE 7.6. A car decorated with emblems of loyalty, and a sign
modi ed to reject one kind of loyalty.
Given such strong links to love and hate, is it any wonder that the
Loyalty foundation plays an important role in politics? The left
tends toward universalism and away from nationalism,26 so it often
has trouble connecting to voters who rely on the Loyalty
foundation. Indeed, because of its strong reliance upon the Care
foundation, American liberals are often hostile to American foreign
policy. For example, during the last year of George W. Bush’s
presidency, somebody vandalized a stop sign near my home ( gure
7.6). I can’t be certain that the vandal rejects teams and groups of
all sorts, but I can be con dent that he or she is far to the left of the
owner of “OGLORY.” The two photographs show opposing
statements about the need for Americans to be team players at a
time when America was ghting wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.
Liberal activists often make it easy for conservatives to connect
liberalism to the Loyalty foundation—and not in a good way. The
title of Ann Coulter’s 2003 book says it all: Treason: Liberal
Treachery from the Cold War to the War on Terrorism.27

4. THE AUTHORITY/SUBVERSION FOUNDATION
Soon after I returned from India I was talking with a taxi driver
who told me that he had just become a father. I asked him if he
planned on staying in the United States or returning to his native
Jordan. I’ll never forget his response: “We will return to Jordan
because I never want to hear my son say ‘fuck you’ to me.” Now,
most American children will never say such an awful thing to their
parents, but some will, and many more will say it indirectly.
Cultures vary enormously in the degree to which they demand that
respect be shown to parents, teachers, and others in positions of
authority.
The urge to respect hierarchical relationships is so deep that many
languages encode it directly. In French, as in other romance
languages, speakers are forced to choose whether they’ll address
someone using the respectful form (vous) or the familiar form (tu).
Even English, which doesn’t embed status into verb conjugations,
embeds it elsewhere. Until recently, Americans addressed strangers
and superiors using title plus last name (Mrs. Smith, Dr. Jones),
whereas intimates and subordinates were called by rst name. If
you’ve ever felt a ash of distaste when a salesperson called you by
rst name without being invited to do so, or if you felt a pang of
awkwardness when an older person you have long revered asked
you to call him by rst name, then you have experienced the
activation of some of the modules that comprise the
Authority/subversion foundation.
The obvious way to begin thinking about the evolution of the
Authority foundation is to consider the pecking orders and
dominance hierarchies of chickens, dogs, chimpanzees, and so many
other species that live in groups. The displays made by low-ranking
individuals are often similar across species because their function is
always the same—to appear submissive, which means small and
nonthreatening. The failure to detect signs of dominance and then
to respond accordingly often results in a beating.
So far this doesn’t sound like a promising origin story for a
“moral” foundation; it sounds like the origin of oppression of the

weak by the powerful. But authority should not be confused with
power.28 Even among chimpanzees, where dominance hierarchies
are indeed about raw power and the ability to in ict violence, the
alpha male performs some socially bene cial functions, such as
taking on the “control role.”29 He resolves some disputes and
suppresses much of the violent con ict that erupts when there is no
clear alpha male. As the primatologist Frans de Waal puts it:
“Without agreement on rank and a certain respect for authority
there can be no great sensitivity to social rules, as anyone who has
tried to teach simple house rules to a cat will agree.”30
This control role is quite visible in human tribes and early
civilizations. Many of the earliest legal texts begin by grounding the
king’s rule in divine choice, and then they dedicate the king’s
authority to providing order and justice. The very rst sentence of
the Code of Hammurabi (eighteenth century BCE) includes this
clause: “Then Anu and Bel [two gods] called by name me,
Hammurabi, the exalted prince, who feared God, to bring about the
rule of righteousness in the land, to destroy the wicked and the evildoers; so that the strong should not harm the weak.”31
Human authority, then, is not just raw power backed by the
threat of force. Human authorities take on responsibility for
maintaining order and justice. Of course, authorities often exploit
their subordinates for their own bene t while believing they are
perfectly just. But if we want to understand how human civilizations
burst forth and covered the Earth in just a few thousand years, we’ll
have to look closely at the role of authority in creating moral order.
When I began graduate school I subscribed to the common liberal
belief that hierarchy = power = exploitation = evil. But when I
began to work with Alan Fiske, I discovered that I was wrong.
Fiske’s theory of the four basic kinds of social relationships includes
one called “Authority Ranking.” Drawing on his own eldwork in
Africa, Fiske showed that people who relate to each other in this
way have mutual expectations that are more like those of a parent
and child than those of a dictator and fearful underlings:

In Authority Ranking, people have asymmetric positions
in a linear hierarchy in which subordinates defer,
respect, and (perhaps) obey, while superiors take
precedence and take pastoral responsibility for
subordinates.
Examples
are
military
hierarchies … ancestor worship ([including] o erings of
lial piety and expectations of protection and
enforcement of norms), [and] monotheistic religious
moralities … Authority Ranking relationships are based
on perceptions of legitimate asymmetries, not coercive
power; they are not inherently exploitative.32
The Authority foundation, as I describe it, is borrowed directly
from Fiske. It is more complex than the other foundations because
its modules must look in two directions—up toward superiors and
down toward subordinates. These modules work together to help
individuals meet the adaptive challenge of forging bene cial
relationships within hierarchies. We are the descendants of the
individuals who were best able to play the game—to rise in status
while cultivating the protection of superiors and the allegiance of
subordinates.33
The original triggers of some of these modules include patterns of
appearance and behavior that indicate higher versus lower rank.
Like chimpanzees, people track and remember who is above
whom.34 When people within a hierarchical order act in ways that
negate or subvert that order, we feel it instantly, even if we
ourselves have not been directly harmed. If authority is in part
about protecting order and fending o chaos, then everyone has a
stake in supporting the existing order and in holding people
accountable for ful lling the obligations of their station.35
The current triggers of the Authority/subversion foundation,
therefore, include anything that is construed as an act of obedience,
disobedience, respect, disrespect, submission, or rebellion, with
regard to authorities perceived to be legitimate. Current triggers
also include acts that are seen to subvert the traditions, institutions,
or values that are perceived to provide stability. As with the Loyalty

foundation, it is much easier for the political right to build on this
foundation than it is for the left, which often de nes itself in part
by its opposition to hierarchy, inequality, and power. It should not
be di cult for you to guess the politics of the magazine advertised
in gure 7.7. Conversely, while Methodists are not necessarily
conservative, the sign in front of their church tells you they ain’t no
Unitarians.

FIGURE 7.7. Two rather di erent valuations of the Authority/subversion
foundation. Advertisement for the liberal magazine The Nation (top);
church in Charlottesville, Virginia (bottom; photo by Sarah Estes
Graham). (photo credit 7.3)
5. THE SANCTITY/DEGRADATION FOUNDATION
In early 2001, Armin Meiwes, a German computer technician,
posted an unusual advertisement on the Web: “Looking for a wellbuilt 21-to-30-year-old to be slaughtered and then consumed.”
Hundreds of men responded by email, and Meiwes interviewed a
few of them at his farmhouse. Bernd Brandes, a forty-three-year-old
computer engineer, was the rst respondent who didn’t change his
mind when he realized that Meiwes was not engaging in mere
fantasy. (Warning: Squeamish readers should skip the entire next
paragraph.)
On the evening of March 9, the two men made a video to prove
that Brandes fully consented to what was about to happen. Brandes
then took some sleeping pills and alcohol, but he was still alert
when Meiwes cut o Brandes’s penis, after being unable to bite it

o (as Brandes had requested). Meiwes then sautéed the penis in a
frying pan with wine and garlic. Brandes took a bite of it, then went
o to a bathtub to bleed to death. A few hours later Brandes was
not yet dead, so Meiwes kissed him, stabbed him in the throat, and
then hung the body on a meat hook to strip o the esh. Meiwes
stored the esh in his freezer and ate it gradually over the next ten
months. Meiwes was ultimately caught, arrested, and tried, but
because Brandes’s participation was fully voluntary, Meiwes was
convicted only of manslaughter, not murder, the rst time the case
went to trial.36
If your moral matrix is limited to the ethic of autonomy, you’re at
high risk of being dumbfounded by this case. You surely nd it
disturbing, and the violence of it probably activates your Care/harm
foundation. But any attempt to condemn Meiwes or Brandes runs
smack into John Stuart Mill’s harm principle, which I introduced in
chapter 5: “The only purpose for which power can be rightfully
exercised over any member of a civilized community, against his
will, is to prevent harm to others.” The next line of the original
quote is: “His own good, either physical or moral, is not su cient
warrant.” From within the ethic of autonomy, people have a right
to live their lives as they please (as long as they harm nobody), and
they have a right to end their lives how and when they please (as
long as they leave no dependents unsupported). Brandes chose an
extraordinarily revolting means of death, but as the Penn students
in my dissertation research often said, just because something is
disgusting, that doesn’t make it wrong. Yet most people feel that
there was something terribly wrong here, and that it should be
against the law for adults to engage in consensual activities such as
this. Why?
Imagine that Meiwes served his prison sentence and then returned
to his home. (Assume that a team of psychiatrists established that he
posed no threat to anyone who did not explicitly ask to be eaten.)
Imagine that his home was one block away from your home. Would
you nd his return unsettling? If Meiwes was then forced by social
pressure to move out of your town, might you feel some relief? And
what about the house where this atrocity happened? How much

would someone have to pay you to live in it for a week? Might you
feel that the stain would be expunged only if the house was burned
to the ground?
These feelings—of stain, pollution, and puri cation—are
irrational from a utilitarian point of view, but they make perfect
sense in Shweder’s ethic of divinity. Meiwes and Brandes colluded
to treat Brandes’s body as a piece of meat, to which they added the
extra horror of a splash of sexuality. They behaved monstrously—as
low as any humans can go on the vertical dimension of divinity that
I discussed in chapter 5. Only worms and demons eat human esh.
But why do we care so much what other people choose to do with
their bodies?
Most animals are born knowing what to eat. A koala bear’s
sensory systems are “structured in advance of experience” to guide
it to eucalyptus leaves. Humans, however, must learn what to eat.
Like rats and cockroaches, we’re omnivores.
Being an omnivore has the enormous advantage of exibility: You
can wander into a new continent and be quite con dent that you’ll
nd something to eat. But it also has the disadvantage that new
foods can be toxic, infected with microbes, or riddled with parasitic
worms. The “omnivore’s dilemma” (a term coined by Paul Rozin)37
is that omnivores must seek out and explore new potential foods
while remaining wary of them until they are proven safe.
Omnivores therefore go through life with two competing
motives: neophilia (an attraction to new things) and neophobia (a
fear of new things). People vary in terms of which motive is
stronger, and this variation will come back to help us in later
chapters: Liberals score higher on measures of neophilia (also
known as “openness to experience”), not just for new foods but also
for new people, music, and ideas. Conservatives are higher on
neophobia; they prefer to stick with what’s tried and true, and they
care a lot more about guarding borders, boundaries, and
traditions.38
The emotion of disgust evolved initially to optimize responses to
the omnivore’s dilemma.39 Individuals who had a properly
calibrated sense of disgust were able to consume more calories than

their overly disgustable cousins while consuming fewer dangerous
microbes than their insu ciently disgustable cousins. But it’s not
just food that posed a threat: when early hominids came down from
the trees and began living in larger groups on the ground, they
greatly increased their risk of infection from each other, and from
each other’s waste products. The psychologist Mark Schaller has
shown that disgust is part of what he calls the “behavioral immune
system”—a set of cognitive modules that are triggered by signs of
infection or disease in other people and that make you want to get
away from those people.40 It’s a lot more e ective to prevent
infection by washing your food, casting out lepers, or simply
avoiding dirty people than it is to let the microbes into your body
and then hope that your biological immune system can kill every
last one of them.
The original adaptive challenge that drove the evolution of the
Sanctity foundation, therefore, was the need to avoid pathogens,
parasites, and other threats that spread by physical touch or
proximity. The original triggers of the key modules that compose
this foundation include smells, sights, or other sensory patterns that
predict the presence of dangerous pathogens in objects or people.
(Examples include human corpses, excrement, scavengers such as
vultures, and people with visible lesions or sores.)
The current triggers of the Sanctity foundation, however, are
extraordinarily variable and expandable across cultures and eras. A
common and direct expansion is to out-group members. Cultures
di er in their attitudes toward immigrants, and there is some
evidence that liberal and welcoming attitudes are more common in
times and places where disease risks are lower.41 Plagues,
epidemics, and new diseases are usually brought in by foreigners—
as are many new ideas, goods, and technologies—so societies face
an analogue of the omnivore’s dilemma, balancing xenophobia and
xenophilia.
As with the Authority foundation, Sanctity seems to be o to a
poor start as a foundation of morality. Isn’t it just a primitive
response to pathogens? And doesn’t this response lead to prejudice

and discrimination? Now that we have antibiotics, we should reject
this foundation entirely, right?
Not so fast. The Sanctity foundation makes it easy for us to regard
some things as “untouchable,” both in a bad way (because
something is so dirty or polluted we want to stay away) and in a
good way (because something is so hallowed, so sacred, that we
want to protect it from desecration). If we had no sense of disgust, I
believe we would also have no sense of the sacred. And if you think,
as I do, that one of the greatest unsolved mysteries is how people
ever came together to form large cooperative societies, then you
might take a special interest in the psychology of sacredness. Why
do people so readily treat objects ( ags, crosses), places (Mecca, a
battle eld related to the birth of your nation), people (saints,
heroes), and principles (liberty, fraternity, equality) as though they
were of in nite value? Whatever its origins, the psychology of
sacredness helps bind individuals into moral communities.42 When
someone in a moral community desecrates one of the sacred pillars
supporting the community, the reaction is sure to be swift,
emotional, collective, and punitive.
To return, nally, to Meiwes and Brandes: They caused no harm
to anyone in a direct, material, or utilitarian way.43 But they
desecrated several of the bedrock moral principles of Western
society, such as our shared beliefs that human life is supremely
valuable, and that the human body is more than just a walking slab
of meat. They trampled on these principles not out of necessity, and
not in service to a higher goal, but out of carnal desire. If Mill’s
harm principle prevents us from outlawing their actions, then Mill’s
harm principle seems inadequate as the basis for a moral
community. Whether or not God exists, people feel that some
things, actions, and people are noble, pure, and elevated; others are
base, polluted, and degraded.
Does the Meiwes case tell us anything about politics? It’s too
revolting a case to use in research; I’m con dent that liberals and
conservatives would all condemn Meiwes (although I’m not so sure
about libertarians).44 But if we turn down the disgust a few notches,
we see a vast di erence between left and right over the use of

concepts such as sanctity and purity. American conservatives are
more likely to talk about “the sanctity of life” and “the sanctity of
marriage.” Conservatives—particularly religious conservatives—are
more likely to view the body as a temple, housing a soul within,
rather than as a machine to be optimized, or as a playground to be
used for fun.
The two images in gure 7.8 show exactly the contrast that
Shweder had described in his ethic of divinity. The image on top is
from a fteenth-century painting, The Allegory of Chastity.45 It shows
the Virgin Mary raised and protected by an amethyst rock
formation. From beneath her ows a stream (symbolizing her
purity) guarded by two lions. The painting portrays chastity as a
virtue, a treasure to be guarded.
This idea is not just ancient history; it inspired a virginity pledge
movement in the United States as recently as the 1990s. The group
Silver Ring Thing asks its members to vow to remain celibate and
pure until marriage. Those who make the vow are given a silver
ring, to wear like a wedding ring, inscribed with the name of Bible
verses such as “1 Thessalonians 4:3–4.” Those verses state: “For this
is the will of God, your sancti cation: that you abstain from
fornication; that each one of you know how to control your own
body in holiness and honor.”46
On the left, however, the virtue of chastity is usually dismissed as
outdated and sexist. Jeremy Bentham urged us to maximize our
“hedons” (pleasures) and minimize our “dolors” (pains). If your
morality focuses on individuals and their conscious experiences,
then why on earth should anyone not use their body as a
playground? Devout Christians are often lampooned by secular
liberals as uptight, pleasure-fearing prudes.

FIGURE 7.8. Two di erent views of the Sanctity/degradation
foundation. The Allegory of Chastity, by Hans Memling (1475), and a
bumper sticker on a car in Charlottesville, Virginia. Another sticker
on the car (supporting Democratic Senator Jim Webb) con rmed
that the owner leaned left.

The Sanctity foundation is used most heavily by the religious
right, but it is also used on the spiritual left. You can see the
foundation’s original impurity-avoidance function in New Age
grocery stores, where you’ll nd a variety of products that promise
to cleanse you of “toxins.” And you’ll nd the Sanctity foundation
underlying some of the moral passions of the environmental
movement. Many environmentalists revile industrialism, capitalism,
and automobiles not just for the physical pollution they create but
also for a more symbolic kind of pollution—a degradation of nature,
and of humanity’s original nature, before it was corrupted by
industrial capitalism.47
The Sanctity foundation is crucial for understanding the American
culture wars, particularly over biomedical issues. If you dismiss the
Sanctity foundation entirely, then it’s hard to understand the fuss
over most of today’s biomedical controversies. The only ethical
question about abortion becomes: At what point can a fetus feel
pain? Doctor-assisted suicide becomes an obviously good thing:
People who are su ering should be allowed to end their lives, and
should be given medical help to do it painlessly. Same for stem cell
research: Why not take tissue from all those embryos living in
suspended animation in fertility clinics? They can’t feel pain, but
their tissues could help researchers develop cures that would spare
sentient people from pain.
The philosopher Leon Kass is among the foremost spokesmen for
Shweder’s ethic of divinity, and for the Sanctity foundation on
which it is based. Writing in 1997, the year after Dolly the sheep
became the rst cloned mammal, Kass lamented the way that
technology often erases moral boundaries and brings people ever
closer to the dangerous belief that they can do anything they want
to do. In an essay titled “The Wisdom of Repugnance,” Kass argued
that our feelings of disgust can sometimes provide us with a
valuable warning that we are going too far, even when we are
morally dumbfounded and can’t justify those feelings by pointing to
victims:

Repugnance, here as elsewhere, revolts against the
excesses of human willfulness, warning us not to
transgress what is unspeakably profound. Indeed, in this
age in which everything is held to be permissible so long
as it is freely done, in which our given human nature no
longer commands respect, in which our bodies are
regarded as mere instruments of our autonomous
rational wills, repugnance may be the only voice left
that speaks up to defend the central core of our
humanity. Shallow are the souls that have forgotten how
to shudder.48
IN SUM
I began this chapter by trying to trigger your intuitions about the
ve moral foundations that I introduced in chapter 6. I then de ned
innateness as “organized in advance of experience,” like the rst
draft of a book that gets revised as individuals grow up within
diverse cultures. This de nition allowed me to propose that the
moral foundations are innate. Particular rules and virtues vary
across cultures, so you’ll get fooled if you look for universality in
the nished books. You won’t nd a single paragraph that exists in
identical form in every human culture. But if you look for links
between evolutionary theory and anthropological observations, you
can take some educated guesses about what was in the universal
rst draft of human nature. I tried to make (and justify) ve such
guesses:
• The Care/harm foundation evolved in response to the
adaptive challenge of caring for vulnerable children. It
makes us sensitive to signs of su ering and need; it
makes us despise cruelty and want to care for those who
are su ering.
• The Fairness/cheating foundation evolved in response to
the adaptive challenge of reaping the rewards of

cooperation without getting exploited. It makes us
sensitive to indications that another person is likely to be
a good (or bad) partner for collaboration and reciprocal
altruism. It makes us want to shun or punish cheaters.

• The Loyalty/betrayal foundation evolved in response to
the adaptive challenge of forming and maintaining
coalitions. It makes us sensitive to signs that another
person is (or is not) a team player. It makes us trust and
reward such people, and it makes us want to hurt,
ostracize, or even kill those who betray us or our group.

• The Authority/subversion foundation evolved in response
to the adaptive challenge of forging relationships that
will bene t us within social hierarchies. It makes us
sensitive to signs of rank or status, and to signs that
other people are (or are not) behaving properly, given
their position.
• The Sanctity/degradation foundation evolved initially in
response to the adaptive challenge of the omnivore’s
dilemma, and then to the broader challenge of living in a
world of pathogens and parasites. It includes the
behavioral immune system, which can make us wary of a
diverse array of symbolic objects and threats. It makes it
possible for people to invest objects with irrational and
extreme values—both positive and negative—which are
important for binding groups together.
I showed how the two ends of the political spectrum rely upon
each foundation in di erent ways, or to di erent degrees. It appears
that the left relies primarily on the Care and Fairness foundations,
whereas the right uses all ve. If this is true, then is the morality of
the left like the food served in The True Taste restaurant? Does leftwing morality activate just one or two taste receptors, whereas
right-wing morality engages a broader palate, including loyalty,
authority, and sanctity? And if so, does that give conservative
politicians a broader variety of ways to connect with voters?

