EIGHT

The Conservative Advantage

In January 2005, I was invited to speak to the Charlottesville
Democratic Party about moral psychology. I welcomed the chance
because I had spent much of 2004 as a speechwriter for John
Kerry’s presidential campaign. Not a paid speechwriter—just a guy
who, while walking his dog every evening, mentally rewrote some
of Kerry’s ine ectual appeals. For example, in Kerry’s acceptance
speech at the Democratic National Convention, he listed a variety of
failures of the Bush administration and after each one he
proclaimed, “America can do better” and “Help is on the way.” The
rst slogan connected to no moral foundation at all. The second one
connected weakly to the Care/harm foundation, but only if you
think of America as a nation of helpless citizens who need a
Democratic president to care for them.
In my rewrite, Kerry listed a variety of Bush’s campaign promises
and after each one he asked, “You gonna pay for that, George?”
That simple slogan would have made Bush’s many new programs,
coming on top of his tax cuts and vast expenditures on two wars,
look like shoplifting rather than generosity. Kerry could have
activated the cheater detection modules of the Fairness/cheating
foundation.
The message of my talk to the Charlottesville Democrats was
simple: Republicans understand moral psychology. Democrats don’t.
Republicans have long understood that the elephant is in charge of
political behavior, not the rider, and they know how elephants
work.1 Their slogans, political commercials, and speeches go
straight for the gut, as in the infamous 1988 ad showing a mug shot
of a black man, Willie Horton, who committed a brutal murder after

being released from prison on a weekend furlough by the “soft-oncrime” Democratic candidate, Governor Michael Dukakis.
Democrats have often aimed their appeals more squarely at the
rider, emphasizing speci c policies and the bene ts they’ll bring to
you, the voter.
Neither George W. Bush nor his father, George H. W. Bush, had
the ability to move audiences to tears, but both had the great
fortune to run against cerebral and emotionally cool Democrats
(Michael Dukakis, Al Gore, and John Kerry). It is no coincidence
that the only Democrat since Franklin Roosevelt to win election and
then reelection combined gregariousness and oratorical skill with an
almost musical emotionality. Bill Clinton knew how to charm
elephants.
Republicans don’t just aim to cause fear, as some Democrats
charge. They trigger the full range of intuitions described by Moral
Foundations Theory. Like Democrats, they can talk about innocent
victims (of harmful Democratic policies) and about fairness
(particularly the unfairness of taking tax money from hardworking
and prudent people to support cheaters, slackers, and irresponsible
fools). But Republicans since Nixon have had a near-monopoly on
appeals to loyalty (particularly patriotism and military virtues) and
authority (including respect for parents, teachers, elders, and the
police, as well as for traditions). And after they embraced Christian
conservatives during Ronald Reagan’s 1980 campaign and became
the party of “family values,” Republicans inherited a powerful
network of Christian ideas about sanctity and sexuality that allowed
them to portray Democrats as the party of Sodom and Gomorrah.
Set against the rising crime and chaos of the 1960s and 1970s, this
ve-foundation morality had wide appeal, even to many Democrats
(the so-called Reagan Democrats). The moral vision o ered by the
Democrats since the 1960s, in contrast, seemed narrow, too focused
on helping victims and ghting for the rights of the oppressed. The
Democrats o ered just sugar (Care) and salt (Fairness as equality),
whereas Republican morality appealed to all ve taste receptors.
That was the story I told to the Charlottesville Democrats. I didn’t
blame the Republicans for trickery. I blamed the Democrats for

psychological naiveté. I expected an angry reaction, but after two
consecutive losses to George W. Bush, Democrats were so hungry
for an explanation that the audience seemed willing to consider
mine. Back then, however, my explanation was just speculation. I
had not yet collected any data to support my claim that
conservatives responded to a broader set of moral tastes than did
liberals.2
MEASURING MORALS
Fortunately, a graduate student arrived at UVA that year who made
an honest man out of me. If Match.com had o ered a way to pair up
advisors and grad students, I couldn’t have found a better partner
than Jesse Graham. He had graduated from the University of
Chicago (scholarly breadth), earned a master’s degree at the
Harvard Divinity School (an appreciation of religion), and then
spent a year teaching English in Japan (cross-cultural experience).
For Jesse’s rst-year research project, he created a questionnaire to
measure people’s scores on the ve moral foundations.
We worked with my colleague Brian Nosek to create the rst
version of the Moral Foundations Questionnaire (MFQ), which
began with these instructions: “When you decide whether
something is right or wrong, to what extent are the following
considerations relevant to your thinking?” We then explained the
response scale, from 0 (“not at all relevant—this has nothing to do
with my judgments of right and wrong”) to 5 (“extremely relevant
—this is one of the most important factors when I judge right and
wrong”). We then listed fteen statements—three for each of the
ve foundations—such as “whether or not someone was cruel” (for
the Care foundation) or “whether or not someone showed a lack of
respect for authority” (for the Authority foundation).
Brian was the director of ProjectImplicit.org, one of the largest
research sites on the Internet, so we were able recruit 1,600
subjects to ll out the MFQ within a week. When Jesse graphed the
data, he found exactly the di erences we had predicted. I’ve

reprinted Jesse’s graph in gure 8.1, which shows responses from
people who said they were “very liberal” on the far left, and then
moves along the political spectrum through moderates (in the
middle) to people who self-identi ed as “very conservative” (on the
far right).3

8.1. The rst evidence for Moral Foundations Theory. (Adapted
with permission from Graham, Haidt, and Nosek 2009, p. 1033;
published by the American Psychological Association.)

FIGURE

As you can see, the lines for Care and Fairness (the two top lines)
are moderately high across the board. Everyone—left, right, and
center—says that concerns about compassion, cruelty, fairness, and
injustice are relevant to their judgments about right and wrong. Yet
still, the lines slope downward. Liberals say that these issues are a
bit more relevant to morality than do conservatives.

But when we look at the Loyalty, Authority, and Sanctity
foundations, the story is quite di erent. Liberals largely reject these
considerations. They show such a large gap between these
foundations versus the Care and Fairness foundations that we might
say, as shorthand, that liberals have a two-foundation morality.4 As
we move to the right, however, the lines slope upward. By the time
we reach people who are “very conservative,” all ve lines have
converged. We can say, as shorthand, that conservatives have a
ve-foundation morality. But can it really be true that conservatives
care about a broader range of moral values and issues than do
liberals? Or did this pattern only arise because of the particular
questions that we happened to ask?
Over the next year, Jesse, Brian, and I re ned the MFQ. We
added questions that asked people to rate their agreement with
statements we wrote to trigger intuitions related to each
foundation. For example, do you agree with this Care item: “One of
the worst things a person can do is to hurt a defenseless animal”?
How about this Loyalty item: “It is more important to be a team
player than to express oneself”? Jesse’s original ndings replicated
beautifully. We found the same pattern as in gure 8.1, and we
found it in subjects from many countries besides the United States.5
I began to show our graphs whenever I gave lectures about moral
psychology. Ravi Iyer, a graduate student at the University of
Southern California, heard me speak in the fall of 2006 and emailed
me to ask if he could use the MFQ in his research on attitudes about
immigration. Ravi was a skilled Web programmer, and he o ered to
help Jesse and me create a website for our own research. At around
the same time, Sena Koleva, a graduate student at the University of
California at Irvine, asked me if she could use the MFQ. Sena was
studying political psychology with her advisor, Pete Ditto (whose
work on “motivated reasoning” I described in chapter 4). I said yes
to both requests.
Every January, social psychologists from all over the world ock
to a single conference to learn about each other’s work—and to
gossip, network, and drink. In 2007, that conference was held in
Memphis, Tennessee. Ravi, Sena, Pete, Jesse, and I met late one

evening at the hotel bar, to share our ndings and get to know one
another.
All ve of us were politically liberal, yet we shared the same
concern about the way our liberal eld approached political
psychology. The goal of so much research was to explain what was
wrong with conservatives. (Why don’t conservatives embrace
equality, diversity, and change, like normal people?) Just that day,
in a session on political psychology, several of the speakers had
made jokes about conservatives, or about the cognitive limitations
of President Bush. All ve of us felt this was wrong, not just
morally (because it creates a hostile climate for the few
conservatives who might have been in the audience) but also
scienti cally (because it reveals a motivation to reach certain
conclusions, and we all knew how easy it is for people to reach their
desired conclusions).6 The ve of us also shared a deep concern
about the polarization and incivility of American political life, and
we wanted to use moral psychology to help political partisans
understand and respect each other.
We talked about several ideas for future studies, and for each one
Ravi said, “You know, we could do that online.” He proposed that
we create a website where people could register when they rst
visit, and then take part in dozens of studies on moral and political
psychology. We could then link all of their responses together and
develop a comprehensive moral pro le for each (anonymous)
visitor. In return, we’d give visitors detailed feedback, showing
them how they compared to others. If we made the feedback
interesting enough, people would tell their friends about the site.
Over the next few months, Ravi designed the website—
www.YourMorals.org—and the ve of us worked together to
improve it. On May 9 we got approval from the UVA human
subjects committee to conduct the research, and the site went live
the next day. Within a few weeks we were getting ten or more
visitors a day. Then, in August, the science writer Nicholas Wade
interviewed me for an article in the New York Times on the roots of
morality.7 He included the name of our website. The article ran on

September 18, and by the end of that week, 26,000 new visitors had
completed one or more of our surveys.
Figure 8.2 shows our data on the MFQ as it stood in 2011, with
more than 130,000 subjects. We’ve made many improvements since
Jesse’s rst simple survey, but we always nd the same basic
pattern that he found in 2006. The lines for Care and Fairness slant
downward; the lines for Loyalty, Authority, and Sanctity slant
upward. Liberals value Care and Fairness far more than the other
three foundations; conservatives endorse all ve foundations more
or less equally.8

FIGURE

8.2. Scores on the MFQ, from 132,000 subjects, in 2011. Data
from YourMorals.org.

We’ve found this basic di erence no matter how we ask the
questions. For example, in one study we asked people which traits

would make them more or less likely to choose a particular breed of
dog as a pet. On which side of the political spectrum do you
suppose these traits would be most appealing?
• The breed is extremely gentle.

• The breed is very independent-minded and relates to its
owner as a friend and equal.
• The breed is extremely loyal to its home and family and it
doesn’t warm up quickly to strangers.

• The breed is very obedient and is easily trained to take
orders.

• The breed is very clean and, like a cat, takes great care
with its personal hygiene.
We found that people want dogs that t their own moral
matrices. Liberals want dogs that are gentle (i.e., that t with the
values of the Care foundation) and relate to their owners as equals
(Fairness as equality). Conservatives, on the other hand, want dogs
that are loyal (Loyalty) and obedient (Authority). (The Sanctity
item showed no partisan tilt; both sides prefer clean dogs.)
The converging pattern shown in gure 8.2 is not just something
we nd in Internet surveys. We found it in church too. Jesse
obtained the text of dozens of sermons that were delivered in
Unitarian (liberal) churches, and dozens more that were delivered in
Southern Baptist (conservative) churches. Before reading the
sermons, Jesse identi ed hundreds of words that were conceptually
related to each foundation (for example, peace, care, and compassion
on the positive side of Care, and su er, cruel, and brutal on the
negative side; obey, duty, and honor on the positive side of
Authority, and defy, disrespect, and rebel on the negative side). Jesse
then used a computer program called LIWC to count the number of
times that each word was used in the two sets of texts.9 This simpleminded method con rmed our ndings from the MFQ: Unitarian
preachers made greater use of Care and Fairness words, while

Baptist preachers made greater use of Loyalty, Authority, and
Sanctity words.10
We nd this pattern in brain waves too. We teamed up with
Jamie Morris, a social neuroscientist at UVA, to present liberal and
conservative students with sixty sentences that came in two
versions. One version endorsed an idea consistent with a particular
foundation, and the other version rejected the idea. For example,
half of our subjects read “Total equality in the workplace is
necessary.” The other half read “Total equality in the workplace is
unrealistic.” Subjects wore a special cap to measure their brain
waves as the words in each sentence were ashed up on a screen,
one word at a time. We later looked at the encephalogram (EEG) to
determine whose brains showed evidence of surprise or shock at the
moment that the key word was presented (e.g., necessary versus
unrealistic).11
Liberal brains showed more surprise, compared to conservative
brains, in response to sentences that rejected Care and Fairness
concerns. They also showed more surprise in response to sentences
that endorsed Loyalty, Authority, and Sanctity concerns (for
example, “In the teenage years, parental advice should be heeded”
versus “… should be questioned”). In other words, when people
choose the labels “liberal” or “conservative,” they are not just
choosing to endorse di erent values on questionnaires. Within the
rst half second after hearing a statement, partisan brains are
already reacting di erently. These initial ashes of neural activity
are the elephant, leaning slightly, which then causes their riders to
reason di erently, search for di erent kinds of evidence, and reach
di erent conclusions. Intuitions come rst, strategic reasoning
second.
WHAT MAKES PEOPLE VOTE REPUBLICAN?
When Barack Obama clinched the Democratic nomination for the
presidential race, I was thrilled. At long last, it seemed, the
Democrats had chosen a candidate with a broader moral palate,

someone able to speak about all ve foundations. In his book The
Audacity of Hope, Obama showed himself to be a liberal who
understood conservative arguments about the need for order and
the value of tradition. When he gave a speech on Father’s Day at a
black church, he praised marriage and the traditional two-parent
family, and he called on black men to take more responsibility for
their children.12 When he gave a speech on patriotism, he criticized
the liberal counterculture of the 1960s for burning American ags
and for failing to honor veterans returning from Vietnam.13
But as the summer of 2008 went on, I began to worry. His speech
to a major civil rights organization was all about social justice and
corporate greed.14 It used only the Care and Fairness foundations,
and fairness often meant equality of outcomes. In his famous speech
in Berlin, he introduced himself as “a fellow citizen of the world”
and he spoke of “global citizenship.”15 He had created a controversy
earlier in the summer by refusing to wear an American ag pin on
the lapel of his jacket, as American politicians typically do. The
controversy seemed absurd to liberals, but the Berlin speech
reinforced the emerging conservative narrative that Obama was a
liberal universalist, someone who could not be trusted to put the
interests of his nation above the interests of the rest of the world.
His opponent, John McCain, took advantage of Obama’s failure to
build on the Loyalty foundation with his own campaign motto:
“Country First.”
Anxious that Obama would go the way of Gore and Kerry, I wrote
an essay applying Moral Foundations Theory to the presidential
race. I wanted to show Democrats how they could talk about policy
issues in ways that would activate more than two foundations. John
Brockman, who runs an online scienti c salon at Edge.org, invited
me to publish the essay at Edge,16 as long as I stripped out most of
the advice and focused on the moral psychology.
I titled the essay “What Makes People Vote Republican?” I began
by summarizing the standard explanations that psychologists had
o ered for decades: Conservatives are conservative because they
were raised by overly strict parents, or because they are
inordinately afraid of change, novelty, and complexity, or because

they su er from existential fears and therefore cling to a simple
worldview with no shades of gray.17 These approaches all had one
feature in common: they used psychology to explain away
conservatism. They made it unnecessary for liberals to take
conservative ideas seriously because these ideas are caused by bad
childhoods or ugly personality traits. I suggested a very di erent
approach: start by assuming that conservatives are just as sincere as
liberals, and then use Moral Foundations Theory to understand the
moral matrices of both sides.
The key idea in the essay was that there are two radically
di erent approaches to the challenge of creating a society in which
unrelated people can live together peacefully. One approach was
exempli ed by John Stuart Mill, the other by the great French
sociologist Emile Durkheim. I described Mill’s vision like this:
First, imagine society as a social contract invented for
our mutual bene t. All individuals are equal, and all
should be left as free as possible to move, develop
talents, and form relationships as they please. The patron
saint of a contractual society is John Stuart Mill, who
wrote (in On Liberty) that “the only purpose for which
power can be rightfully exercised over any member of a
civilized community, against his will, is to prevent harm
to others.” Mill’s vision appeals to many liberals and
libertarians; a Millian society at its best would be a
peaceful, open, and creative place where diverse
individuals respect each other’s rights and band together
voluntarily (as in Obama’s calls for “unity”) to help
those in need or to change the laws for the common
good.
I showed how this vision of society rests exclusively on the Care
and Fairness foundations. If you assume that everyone relies on
those two foundations, you can assume that people will be bothered
by cruelty and injustice and will be motivated to respect each
other’s rights. I then contrasted Mill’s vision with Durkheim’s:

Now imagine society not as an agreement among
individuals but as something that emerged organically
over time as people found ways of living together,
binding themselves to each other, suppressing each
other’s sel shness, and punishing the deviants and free
riders who eternally threaten to undermine cooperative
groups. The basic social unit is not the individual, it is
the hierarchically structured family, which serves as a
model for other institutions. Individuals in such societies
are born into strong and constraining relationships that
profoundly limit their autonomy. The patron saint of this
more binding moral system is the sociologist Emile
Durkheim, who warned of the dangers of anomie
(normlessness) and wrote, in 1897, that “man cannot
become attached to higher aims and submit to a rule if
he sees nothing above him to which he belongs. To free
himself from all social pressure is to abandon himself
and demoralize him.” A Durkheimian society at its best
would be a stable network composed of many nested and
overlapping groups that socialize, reshape, and care for
individuals who, if left to their own devices, would
pursue shallow, carnal, and sel sh pleasures. A
Durkheimian society would value self-control over selfexpression, duty over rights, and loyalty to one’s groups
over concerns for out-groups.
I showed that a Durkheimian society cannot be supported by the
Care and Fairness foundations alone.18 You have to build on the
Loyalty, Authority, and Sanctity foundations as well. I then showed
how the American left fails to understand social conservatives and
the religious right because it cannot see a Durkheimian world as
anything other than a moral abomination.19 A Durkheimian world is
usually hierarchical, punitive, and religious. It places limits on
people’s autonomy and it endorses traditions, often including
traditional gender roles. For liberals, such a vision must be
combated, not respected.

If your moral matrix rests entirely on the Care and Fairness
foundations, then it’s hard to hear the sacred overtones in America’s
uno cial motto: E pluribus unum (from many, one). By “sacred” I
mean the concept I introduced with the Sanctity foundation in the
last chapter. It’s the ability to endow ideas, objects, and events with
in nite value, particularly those ideas, objects, and events that bind
a group together into a single entity. The process of converting
pluribus (diverse people) into unum (a nation) is a miracle that
occurs in every successful nation on Earth.20 Nations decline or
divide when they stop performing this miracle.
In the 1960s, the Democrats became the party of pluribus.
Democrats generally celebrate diversity, support immigration
without assimilation, oppose making English the national language,
don’t like to wear ag pins, and refer to themselves as citizens of
the world. Is it any wonder that they have done so poorly in
presidential elections since 1968?21 The president is the high priest
of what sociologist Robert Bellah calls the “American civil
religion.”22 The president must invoke the name of God (though not
Jesus), glorify America’s heroes and history, quote its sacred texts
(the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution), and
perform the transubstantiation of pluribus into unum. Would
Catholics ever choose a priest who refuses to speak Latin, or who
considers himself a devotee of all gods?
In the remainder of the essay I advised Democrats to stop
dismissing conservatism as a pathology and start thinking about
morality beyond care and fairness. I urged them to close the
sacredness gap between the two parties by making greater use of
the Loyalty, Authority, and Sanctity foundations, not just in their
“messaging,” but in how they think about public policy and the best
interests of the nation.23
WHAT I HAD MISSED
The essay provoked strong reactions from readers, which they
sometimes shared with me by email. On the left, many readers

stayed locked inside their Care-based moral matrices and refused to
believe that conservatism was an alternative moral vision. For
example, one reader said that he agreed with my diagnosis but
thought that narcissism was an additional factor that I had not
mentioned: “Lack of compassion ts them [Republicans], and
narcissists are also lacking this important human trait.” He thought
it was “sad” that Republican narcissism would prevent them from
understanding my perspective on their “illness.”
Reactions from the right were generally more positive. Many
readers with military or religious backgrounds found my portrayal
of their morality accurate and useful, as in this email:
I recently retired from the U.S. Coast Guard after 22
years of service.… After I retired, I took a job with [a
government science agency]. The [new o ce’s] culture
tends more towards the liberal independent model.…
What I am nding here is an organization rife with
individualism and in ghting, at the expense of larger
goals. In the military, I was always impressed with the
great deeds that could be accomplished by a small
number of dedicated people with limited resources. In
my new group, I am impressed when we can accomplish
anything at all.24
I also received quite a few angry responses, particularly from
economic conservatives who believed I had misunderstood their
morality. One such reader sent me an email with the subject line
“Head up ass,” which he explained in this way:
I vote republican because I’m against other people
(authority gures) taking my money (that I work hard
for) and giving it to a non-producing, welfare collecting,
single mother, crack baby producing future democrat.
Simple … You’re an over educated “philosopher” with
soft hands who gets paid to ask stupid questions and

come up with “reasonable” answers.… Go drop some
acid and read some Jung.
Another angry reader posted to a blog discussion his own list of
the “top fteen reasons that people vote Democrat.” His number
one reason was “Low IQ,” but the rest of his list revealed a lot
about his moral matrix and its central value. It included the
following:
• Laziness.

• You want something for nothing.

• You need someone to blame for your problems.

• You’re afraid of personal responsibility or simply not
willing to accept any.

• You despise people who work hard for their money, live
their own lives, and don’t rely on the government for
help cradle to grave.
• You’ve had 5 kids from 3 di erent men and you need the
welfare check.

These emails were over owing with moral content, yet I had a
hard time categorizing that content using Moral Foundations
Theory. Much of it was related to fairness, but this kind of fairness
had nothing to do with equality. It was the fairness of the
Protestant work ethic and the Hindu law of karma: People should
reap what they sow. People who work hard should get to keep the
fruits of their labor. People who are lazy and irresponsible should
su er the consequences.
This email and other responses from economic conservatives
made me realize that I and my colleagues at YourMorals.org had
done a poor job of capturing conservative notions of fairness, which
focused on proportionality, not equality. People should get what
they deserve, based on what they have done. We had assumed that
equality and proportionality were both part of the Fairness
foundation, but the questions we used to measure this foundation

were mostly about equality and equal rights. We therefore found
that liberals cared more about fairness, and that’s what had made
these economic conservatives so angry at me. They believed that
liberals don’t give a damn about fairness (as proportionality).
Are proportionality and equality two di erent expressions of the
same underlying cognitive module, as we had been assuming? Are
they both related to reciprocal altruism, as Robert Trivers had
described it? It’s easy to explain why people care about
proportionality and are so keen to catch cheaters. That follows
directly from Trivers’s analysis of how we gain by exchanging
favors with reliable partners. But what about equality? Are liberal
concerns about political and economic equality really related to
reciprocal altruism? Is the passionate anger people feel toward
bullies and oppressors the same as the anger they feel toward
cheaters?
I looked into what was known about the egalitarianism of huntergatherers, and found a strong argument for splitting apart these two
kinds of fairness. The desire for equality seems to be more closely
related to the psychology of liberty and oppression than to the
psychology of reciprocity and exchange. After talking about these
issues with my colleagues at YourMorals.org, and after we ran some
new studies on various kinds of fairness and liberty, we added a
provisional sixth foundation—Liberty/oppression.25 We also decided
to revise our thinking about fairness to place more emphasis on
proportionality. Let me explain.
THE LIBERTY/OPPRESSION FOUNDATION
In the last chapter I suggested that humans are, like our primate
ancestors, innately equipped to live in dominance hierarchies that
can be quite brutal. But if that’s true, then how come nomadic
hunter-gatherers are always egalitarian? There’s no hierarchy (at
least among the adult males), there’s no chief, and the norms of the
group actively encourage sharing resources, particularly meat.26
The archaeological evidence supports this view, indicating that our

ancestors lived for hundreds of thousands of years in egalitarian
bands of mobile hunter-gatherers.27 Hierarchy only becomes
widespread around the time that groups take up agriculture or
domesticate animals and become more sedentary. These changes
create much more private property and much larger group sizes.
They also put an end to equality. The best land and a share of
everything people produce typically get dominated by a chief,
leader, or elite class (who take some of their wealth with them to
the grave for easy interpretation by later archaeologists). So were
our minds “structured in advance of experience” for hierarchy or for
equality?
For hierarchy, according to the anthropologist Christopher
Boehm. Boehm studied tribal cultures early in his career, but had
also studied chimpanzees with Jane Goodall. He recognized the
extraordinary similarities in the ways that humans and chimpanzees
display dominance and submission. In his book Hierarchy in the
Forest, Boehm concluded that human beings are innately
hierarchical, but that at some point during the last million years our
ancestors underwent a “political transition” that allowed them to
live as egalitarians by banding together to rein in, punish, or kill
any would-be alpha males who tried to dominate the group.
Alpha male chimps are not truly leaders of their groups. They
perform some public services, such as mediating con icts.28 But
most of the time, they are better described as bullies who take what
they want. Yet even among chimpanzees, it sometimes happens that
subordinates gang up to take down alphas, occasionally going as far
as to kill them.29 Alpha male chimps must therefore know their
limits and have enough political skill to cultivate a few allies and
stave o rebellion.
Imagine early hominid life as a tense balance of power between
the alpha (and an ally or two) and the larger set of males who are
shut out of power. Then arm everyone with spears. The balance of
power is likely to shift when physical strength no longer decides the
outcome of every ght. That’s essentially what happened, Boehm
suggests, as our ancestors developed better weapons for hunting
and butchering beginning around ve hundred thousand years ago,

when the archaeological record begins to show a owering of tool
and weapon types.30 Once early humans had developed spears,
anyone could kill a bullying alpha male. And if you add the ability
to communicate with language, and note that every human society
uses language to gossip about moral violations,31 then it becomes
easy to see how early humans developed the ability to unite in
order to shame, ostracize, or kill anyone whose behavior threatened
or simply annoyed the rest of the group.
Boehm’s claim is that at some point during the last half-million
years, well after the advent of language, our ancestors created the
rst true moral communities.32 In these communities, people used
gossip to identify behavior they didn’t like, particularly the
aggressive, dominating behaviors of would-be alpha males. On the
rare occasions when gossip wasn’t enough to bring them into line,
they had the ability to use weapons to take them down. Boehm
quotes a dramatic account of such a community in action among the
!Kung people of the Kalahari Desert:
A man named Twi had killed three other people, when
the community, in a rare move of unanimity, ambushed
and fatally wounded him in full daylight. As he lay
dying, all of the men red at him with poisoned arrows
until, in the words of one informant, “he looked like a
porcupine.” Then, after he was dead, all the women as
well as the men approached his body and stabbed him
with spears, symbolically sharing the responsibility for
his death.33
It’s not that human nature suddenly changed and became
egalitarian; men still tried to dominate others when they could get
away with it. Rather, people armed with weapons and gossip
created what Boehm calls “reverse dominance hierarchies” in which
the rank and le band together to dominate and restrain would-be
alpha males. (It’s uncannily similar to Marx’s dream of the
“dictatorship of the proletariat.”)34 The result is a fragile state of
political egalitarianism achieved by cooperation among creatures

who are innately predisposed to hierarchical arrangements. It’s a
great example of how “innate” refers to the rst draft of the mind.
The nal edition can look quite di erent, so it’s a mistake to look at
today’s hunter-gatherers and say, “See, that’s what human nature
really looks like!”
For groups that made this political transition to egalitarianism,
there was a quantum leap in the development of moral matrices.
People now lived in much denser webs of norms, informal
sanctions, and occasionally violent punishments. Those who could
navigate this new world skillfully and maintain good reputations
were rewarded by gaining the trust, cooperation, and political
support of others. Those who could not respect group norms, or
who acted like bullies, were removed from the gene pool by being
shunned, expelled, or killed. Genes and cultural practices (such as
the collective killing of deviants) coevolved.
The end result, says Boehm, was a process sometimes called “selfdomestication.” Just as animal breeders can create tamer, gentler
creatures by selectively breeding for those traits, our ancestors
began to selectively breed themselves (unintentionally) for the
ability to construct shared moral matrices and then live
cooperatively within them.
The Liberty/oppression foundation, I propose, evolved in
response to the adaptive challenge of living in small groups with
individuals who would, if given the chance, dominate, bully, and
constrain others. The original triggers therefore include signs of
attempted domination. Anything that suggests the aggressive,
controlling behavior of an alpha male (or female) can trigger this
form of righteous anger, which is sometimes called reactance.
(That’s the feeling you get when an authority tells you you can’t do
something and you feel yourself wanting to do it even more
strongly.)35 But people don’t su er oppression in private; the rise of
a would-be dominator triggers a motivation to unite as equals with
other oppressed individuals to resist, restrain, and in extreme cases
kill the oppressor. Individuals who failed to detect signs of
domination and respond to them with righteous and group-unifying
anger faced the prospect of reduced access to food, mates, and all

the other things that make individuals (and their genes) successful
in the Darwinian sense.36
The Liberty foundation obviously operates in tension with the
Authority foundation. We all recognize some kinds of authority as
legitimate in some contexts, but we are also wary of those who
claim to be leaders unless they have rst earned our trust. We’re
vigilant for signs that they’ve crossed the line into selfaggrandizement and tyranny.37
The Liberty foundation supports the moral matrix of
revolutionaries and “freedom ghters” everywhere. The American
Declaration of Independence is a long enumeration of “repeated
injuries and usurpations, all having in direct object the
establishment of absolute Tyranny over these states.” The document
begins with the claim that “all men are created equal” and ends
with a stirring pledge of unity: “We mutually pledge to each other
our Lives, our Fortunes and our sacred Honor.” The French
revolutionaries, similarly, had to call for fraternité and égalité if they
were going to entice commoners to join them in their regicidal
quest for liberté.
The ag of my state, Virginia, celebrates assassination (see gure
8.3). It’s a bizarre
ag, unless you understand the
Liberty/oppression foundation. The ag shows virtue (embodied as
a woman) standing on the chest of a dead king, with the motto Sic
semper tyrannis (“Thus always to tyrants”). That was the rallying cry
said to have been shouted by Marcus Brutus as he and his coconspirators murdered Julius Caesar for acting like an alpha male.
John Wilkes Booth shouted it from center stage at Ford’s Theatre
moments after shooting Abraham Lincoln (whom Southerners
perceived to be a tyrant who prevented them from declaring
independence).

FIGURE

8.3. The ag of Virginia, illustrating the Liberty/oppression
foundation.

Murder often seems virtuous to revolutionaries. It just somehow
feels like the right thing to do, and these feelings seem far removed
from Trivers’s reciprocal altruism and tit for tat. This is not fairness.
This is Boehm’s political transition and reverse dominance.
If the original triggers of this foundation include bullies and
tyrants, the current triggers include almost anything that is
perceived as imposing illegitimate restraints on one’s liberty,
including government (from the perspective of the American right).
In 1993, when Timothy McVeigh was arrested a few hours after he
blew up a federal o ce building in Oklahoma City, killing 168
people, he was wearing a T-shirt that said Sic semper tyrannis. Less
ominously, the populist anger of the Tea Party relies on this
foundation, as shown in their uno cial ag, which says “Don’t
tread on me” (see gure 7.4).
But despite these manifestations on the right, the urge to band
together to oppose oppression and replace it with political equality
seems to be at least as prevalent on the left. For example, one
liberal reader of my “Republicans” essay stated Boehm’s thesis
precisely:

The enemy of society to a Liberal is someone who abuses
their power (Authority) and still demands, and in some
cases forces, others to “respect” them anyway.… A
Liberal authority is someone or something that earns
society’s respect through making things happen that unify
society and suppress its enemy. [Emphasis added.]38
It’s not just the accumulation and abuse of political power that
activates the anger of the Liberty/oppression foundation; the
current triggers can expand to encompass the accumulation of
wealth, which helps to explain the pervasive dislike of capitalism on
the far left. For example, one liberal reader explained to me,
“Capitalism is, in the end, predatory—a moral society will be
socialist, i.e., people will help each other.”
You can hear the heavy reliance on the Liberty/oppression
foundation whenever people talk about social justice. The owners of
a progressive co ee shop and “cultural collective” in New Paltz,
New York, used this foundation, along with the Care foundation, to
guide their decorating choices, as you can see in gure 8.4.
The hatred of oppression is found on both sides of the political
spectrum. The di erence seems to be that for liberals—who are
more universalistic and who rely more heavily upon the Care/harm
foundation—the Liberty/oppression foundation is employed in the
service of underdogs, victims, and powerless groups everywhere. It
leads liberals (but not others) to sacralize equality, which is then
pursued by ghting for civil rights and human rights. Liberals
sometimes go beyond equality of rights to pursue equality of
outcomes, which cannot be obtained in a capitalist system. This may
be why the left usually favors higher taxes on the rich, high levels
of services provided to the poor, and sometimes a guaranteed
minimum income for everyone.
Conservatives, in contrast, are more parochial—concerned about
their groups, rather than all of humanity. For them, the
Liberty/oppression foundation and the hatred of tyranny supports
many of the tenets of economic conservatism: don’t tread on me
(with your liberal nanny state and its high taxes), don’t tread on my

business (with your oppressive regulations), and don’t tread on my
nation (with your United Nations and your sovereignty-reducing
international treaties).

8.4. Liberal liberty: Interior of a co ee shop in New Paltz, New
York. The sign on the left says, “No one is free when others are
oppressed.” The ag on the right shows corporate logos replacing
stars on the American ag. The sign in the middle says, “How to
end violence against women and children.”
FIGURE

American conservatives, therefore, sacralize the word liberty, not
the word equality. This unites them politically with libertarians. The
evangelical preacher Jerry Falwell chose the name Liberty
University when he founded his ultraconservative school in 1971.
gure 8.5 shows the car of a Liberty student. Liberty students are
generally pro-authority. They favor traditional patriarchal families.
But they oppose domination and control by a secular government,
particularly a liberal government that will (they fear) use its power
to redistribute wealth (as “comrade Obama” was thought likely to
do).
FAIRNESS AS PROPORTIONALITY
The Tea Party emerged as if from nowhere in the early months of
the Obama presidency to reshape the American political landscape
and realign the American culture war. The movement began in

earnest on February 19, 2009, when Rick Santelli, a correspondent
for a business news network, launched a tirade against a new $75
billion program to help homeowners who had borrowed more
money than they could now repay. Santelli, who was broadcasting
live from the oor of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, said, “The
government is promoting bad behavior.” He then urged President
Obama to put up a website to hold a national referendum

8.5. Conservative liberty: car at a dormitory at Liberty University,
Lynchburg, Virginia. The lower sticker says, “Libertarian: More
Freedom, Less Government.”

FIGURE

to see if we really want to subsidize the losers’ mortgages,
or would we like to at least buy cars and buy houses in
foreclosure and give them to people that might have a
chance to actually prosper down the road and reward

people that could carry the water instead of drink the water.
[At this point, cheers erupted behind him] … This is
America. How many of you people want to pay for your
neighbors’ mortgage that has an extra bathroom and can’t
pay their bills? President Obama, are you listening?
[Emphasis added.]
Santelli then announced that he was thinking of hosting a
“Chicago Tea Party” in July.39 Commentators on the left mocked
Santelli, and many thought he was endorsing an ugly dog-eat-dog
morality in which the “losers” (many of whom had been tricked by
unscrupulous lenders) should be left to die. But in fact Santelli was
arguing for the law of karma.
It took me a long time to understand fairness because, like many
people who study morality, I had thought of fairness as a form of
enlightened self-interest, based on Trivers’s theory of reciprocal
altruism. Genes for fairness evolved, said Trivers, because people
who had those genes outcompeted people who didn’t. We don’t
have to abandon the idea of Homo economicus; we just have to give
him emotional reactions that compel him to play tit for tat.
In the last ten years, however, evolutionary theorists have
realized that reciprocal altruism is not so easy to nd among
nonhuman species.40 The widely reported claim that vampire bats
share blood meals with other bats who had previously shared with
them turned out to be a case of kin selection (relatives sharing
blood), not reciprocal altruism.41 The evidence for reciprocity in
chimpanzees and capuchins is better but still ambiguous.42 It seems
to take more than just a high level of social intelligence to get
reciprocal altruism going. It takes the sort of gossiping, punitive,
moralistic community that emerged only when language and
weaponry made it possible for early humans to take down bullies
and then keep them down with a shared moral matrix.43
Reciprocal altruism also fails to explain why people cooperate in
group activities. Reciprocity works great for pairs of people, who
can play tit for tat, but in groups it’s usually not in an individual’s
self-interest to be the enforcer—the one who punishes slackers. Yet

punish we do, and our propensity to punish turns out to be one of
the keys to large-scale cooperation.44 In one classic experiment,
economists Ernst Fehr and Simon Gächter asked Swiss students to
play twelve rounds of a “public goods” game.45 The game goes like
this: You and your three partners each get 20 tokens on each round
(each worth about ten American cents). You can keep your tokens,
or you can “invest” some or all of them in the group’s common pot.
At the end of each round, the experimenters multiply the tokens in
the pot by 1.6 and then divide the pot among the four players, so if
everyone puts in all 20 tokens, the pot grows from 80 to 128, and
everyone gets to keep 32 tokens (which get turned into real money
at the end of the experiment). But each individual does best by
holding back: If you put in nothing while your partners put in 20
each, you get to keep your 20 tokens plus a quarter of the pot
provided by your trusting partners (a quarter of 96), so you end the
round with 44 tokens.
Each person sat at a computer in a cubicle, so nobody knew who
their partners were on any particular round, although they saw a
feedback screen after each round revealing exactly how much each
of the four players had contributed. Also, after each round, Fehr and
Gächter scrambled the groups so that each person played with three
new partners—there was no chance to develop norms of trust, and
no chance for anyone to use tit for tat (by holding back on the next
round if anyone “cheated” on the current round).
Under these circumstances, the right choice for Homo economicus
is clear: contribute nothing, ever. Yet in fact the students did
contribute to the common pot—about ten tokens on the rst round.
As the game went on, however, people felt burned by the low
contributions of some of their partners, and contributions dropped
steadily, down to about six tokens on the sixth round.
That pattern—partial but declining cooperation—has been
reported before. But here’s the reason this is such a brilliant study:
After the sixth round, the experimenters told subjects that there was
a new rule: After learning how much each of your partners
contributed on each round, you now would have the option of
paying, with your own tokens, to punish speci c other players.

Every token you paid to punish would take three tokens away from
the player you punished.
For Homo economicus, the right course of action is once again
perfectly clear: never pay to punish, because you will never again
play with those three partners, so there is no chance to bene t from
reciprocity or from gaining a tough reputation. Yet remarkably, 84
percent of subjects paid to punish, at least once. And even more
remarkably, cooperation skyrocketed on the very rst round where
punishment was allowed, and it kept on climbing. By the twelfth
round, the average contribution was fteen tokens.46 Punishing bad
behavior promotes virtue and bene ts the group. And just as
Glaucon argued in his ring of Gyges example, when the threat of
punishment is removed, people behave sel shly.
Why did most players pay to punish? In part, because it felt good
to do so.47 We hate to see people take without giving. We want to
see cheaters and slackers “get what’s coming to them.” We want the
law of karma to run its course, and we’re willing to help enforce it.
When people trade favors, both parties end up equal, more or
less, and so it is easy to think (as I had) that reciprocal altruism was
the source of moral intuitions about equality. But egalitarianism
seems to be rooted more in the hatred of domination than in the
love of equality per se.48 The feeling of being dominated or
oppressed by a bully is very di erent from the feeling of being
cheated in an exchange of goods or favors.
Once
my
team
at
YourMorals.org
had
identi ed
Liberty/oppression as a (provisionally) separate sixth foundation,
we began to notice that in our data, concerns about political
equality were related to a dislike of oppression and a concern for
victims, not a desire for reciprocity.49 And if the love of political
equality rests on the Liberty/oppression and Care/harm foundations
rather than the Fairness/cheating foundation, then the Fairness
foundation no longer has a split personality; it’s no longer about
equality and proportionality. It is primarily about proportionality.
When people work together on a task, they generally want to see
the hardest workers get the largest gains.50 People often want
equality of outcomes, but that is because it is so often the case that

people’s inputs were equal. When people divide up money, or any
other kind of reward, equality is just a special case of the broader
principle of proportionality. When a few members of a group
contributed far more than the others—or, even more powerfully,
when a few contributed nothing—most adults do not want to see the
bene ts distributed equally.51
We can therefore re ne the description of the Fairness foundation
that I gave in the last chapter. It’s still a set of modules that evolved
in response to the adaptive challenge of reaping the rewards of
cooperation without getting exploited by free riders.52 But now that
we’ve begun to talk about moral communities within which
cooperation is maintained by gossip and punishment, we can look
beyond individuals trying to choose partners (which I talked about in
the last chapter). We can look more closely at people’s strong
desires to protect their communities from cheaters, slackers, and free
riders, who, if allowed to continue their ways without harassment,
would cause others to stop cooperating, which would cause society
to unravel. The Fairness foundation supports righteous anger when
anyone cheats you directly (for example, a car dealer who
knowingly sells you a lemon). But it also supports a more
generalized concern with cheaters, leeches, and anyone else who
“drinks the water” rather than carries it for the group.
The current triggers of the Fairness foundation vary depending on
a group’s size and on many historical and economic circumstances.
In a large industrial society with a social safety net, the current
triggers are likely to include people who rely upon the safety net
for more than an occasional lifesaving bounce. Concerns about the
abuse of the safety net explain the angry emails I received from
economic conservatives, such as the man who did not want his tax
dollars going to “a non-producing, welfare collecting, single mother,
crack baby producing future democrat.” It explains the
conservative’s list of reasons why people vote Democratic, such as
“laziness” and “You despise people who work hard for their money,
live their own lives, and don’t rely on the government for help
cradle to grave.” It explains Santelli’s rant about bailing out
homeowners, many of whom had lied on their mortgage

applications to qualify for large loans they did not deserve. And it
explains the campaign poster in gure 8.6, from David Cameron’s
Conservative Party in the United Kingdom.
THREE VERSUS SIX
To put this all together: Moral Foundations Theory says that there
are (at least) six psychological systems that comprise the universal
foundations of the world’s many moral matrices.53 The various
moralities found on the political left tend to rest most strongly on
the Care/harm and Liberty/oppression foundations. These two
foundations support ideals of social justice, which emphasize
compassion for the poor and a struggle for political equality among
the subgroups that comprise society. Social justice movements
emphasize solidarity—they call for people to come together to ght
the oppression of bullying, domineering elites. (This is why there is
no separate equality foundation. People don’t crave equality for its
own sake; they ght for equality when they perceive that they are
being bullied or dominated, as during the American and French
revolutions, and the cultural revolutions of the 1960s.)54

8.6. Fairness as proportionality. The right is usually more
concerned about catching and punishing free riders than is the left.
FIGURE

(Campaign poster for the Conservative Party in the UK
parliamentary elections of 2010.)
Everyone—left, right, and center—cares about Care/harm, but
liberals care more. Across many scales, surveys, and political
controversies, liberals turn out to be more disturbed by signs of
violence and su ering, compared to conservatives and especially to
libertarians.55
Everyone—left,
right,
and
center—cares
about
Liberty/oppression, but each political faction cares in a di erent
way. In the contemporary United States, liberals are most concerned
about the rights of certain vulnerable groups (e.g., racial minorities,
children, animals), and they look to government to defend the weak
against oppression by the strong. Conservatives, in contrast, hold
more traditional ideas of liberty as the right to be left alone, and
they often resent liberal programs that use government to infringe
on their liberties in order to protect the groups that liberals care
most about.56 For example, small business owners overwhelmingly
support the Republican Party57 in part because they resent the
government telling them how to run their businesses under its
banner of protecting workers, minorities, consumers, and the
environment. This helps explain why libertarians have sided with
the Republican Party in recent decades. Libertarians care about
liberty almost to the exclusion of all other concerns,58 and their
conception of liberty is the same as that of the Republicans: it is the
right to be left alone, free from government interference.
The Fairness/cheating foundation is about proportionality and the
law of karma. It is about making sure that people get what they
deserve, and do not get things they do not deserve. Everyone—left,
right, and center—cares about proportionality; everyone gets angry
when people take more than they deserve. But conservatives care
more, and they rely on the Fairness foundation more heavily—once
fairness is restricted to proportionality. For example, how relevant
is it to your morality whether “everyone is pulling their own
weight”? Do you agree that “employees who work the hardest
should be paid the most”? Liberals don’t reject these items, but they

are ambivalent. Conservatives, in contrast, endorse items such as
these enthusiastically.59
Liberals may think that they own the concept of karma because of
its New Age associations, but a morality based on compassion and
concerns about oppression forces you to violate karma
(proportionality) in many ways. Conservatives, for example, think
it’s self-evident that responses to crime should be based on
proportionality, as shown in slogans such as “Do the crime, do the
time,” and “Three strikes and you’re out.” Yet liberals are often
uncomfortable with the negative side of karma—retribution—as
shown on the bumper sticker in gure 8.7. After all, retribution
causes harm, and harm activates the Care/harm foundation. A
recent study even found that liberal professors give out a narrower
range of grades than do conservative professors. Conservative
professors are more willing to reward the best students and punish
the worst.60
The
remaining
three
foundations—Loyalty/betrayal,
Authority/subversion, and Sanctity/degradation—show the biggest
and most consistent partisan di erences. Liberals are ambivalent
about these foundations at best, whereas social conservatives
embrace them. (Libertarians have little use for them, which is why
they tend to support liberal positions on social issues such as gay
marriage, drug use, and laws to “protect” the American ag.)

FIGURE

8.7. A car in Charlottesville, Virginia, whose owner prefers
compassion to proportionality.

I began this chapter by telling you our original nding: Liberals
have a two-foundation morality, based on the Care and Fairness

foundations, whereas conservatives have a ve-foundation morality.
But on the basis of what we’ve learned in the last few years, I need
to revise that statement. Liberals have a three-foundation morality,
whereas conservatives use all six. Liberal moral matrices rest on the
Care/harm, Liberty/oppression, and Fairness/cheating foundations,
although liberals are often willing to trade away fairness (as
proportionality) when it con icts with compassion or with their
desire to ght oppression. Conservative morality rests on all six
foundations, although conservatives are more willing than liberals
to sacri ce Care and let some people get hurt in order to achieve
their many other moral objectives.
IN SUM
Moral psychology can help to explain why the Democratic Party has
had so much di culty connecting with voters since 1980.
Republicans understand the social intuitionist model better than do
Democrats. Republicans speak more directly to the elephant. They
also have a better grasp of Moral Foundations Theory; they trigger
every single taste receptor.
I presented the Durkheimian vision of society, favored by social
conservatives, in which the basic social unit is the family, rather
than the individual, and in which order, hierarchy, and tradition are
highly valued. I contrasted this vision with the liberal Millian
vision, which is more open and individualistic. I noted that a Millian
society has di culty binding pluribus into unum. Democrats often
pursue policies that promote pluribus at the expense of unum,
policies that leave them open to charges of treason, subversion, and
sacrilege.
I then described how my colleagues and I revised Moral
Foundations Theory to do a better job of explaining intuitions about
liberty and fairness:
• We added the Liberty/oppression foundation, which
makes people notice and resent any sign of attempted

domination. It triggers an urge to band together to resist
or overthrow bullies and tyrants. This foundation
supports the egalitarianism and antiauthoritarianism of
the left, as well as the don’t-tread-on-me and give-meliberty antigovernment anger of libertarians and some
conservatives.

• We modi ed the Fairness foundation to make it focus
more strongly on proportionality. The Fairness
foundation begins with the psychology of reciprocal
altruism, but its duties expanded once humans created
gossiping and punitive moral communities. Most people
have a deep intuitive concern for the law of karma—
they want to see cheaters punished and good citizens
rewarded in proportion to their deeds.

With these revisions, Moral Foundations Theory can now explain
one of the great puzzles that has preoccupied Democrats in recent
years: Why do rural and working-class Americans generally vote
Republican when it is the Democratic Party that wants to
redistribute money more evenly?
Democrats often say that Republicans have duped these people
into voting against their economic self-interest. (That was the thesis
of the popular 2004 book What’s the Matter with Kansas?.)61 But
from the perspective of Moral Foundations Theory, rural and
working-class voters were in fact voting for their moral interests.
They don’t want to eat at The True Taste restaurant, and they don’t
want their nation to devote itself primarily to the care of victims
and the pursuit of social justice. Until Democrats understand the
Durkheimian vision of society and the di erence between a sixfoundation morality and a three-foundation morality, they will not
understand what makes people vote Republican.
In Part I of this book I presented the rst principle of moral
psychology: Intuitions come rst, strategic reasoning second. In Part II,
I described those intuitions in detail while presenting the second

principle: There’s more to morality than harm and fairness. Now we’re
ready to examine how moral diversity can so easily divide good
people into hostile groups that do not want to understand each
other. We’re ready to move on to the third principle: Morality binds
and blinds.

