NINE

Why Are We So Groupish?

In the terrible days after the terrorist attacks of September 11,
2001, I felt an urge so primitive I was embarrassed to admit it to
my friends: I wanted to put an American ag decal on my car.
The urge seemed to come out of nowhere, with no connection to
anything I’d ever done. It was as if there was an ancient alarm box
in the back of my brain with a sign on it that said, “In case of
foreign attack, break glass and push button.” I hadn’t known the
alarm box was there, but when those four planes broke the glass
and pushed the button I had an overwhelming sense of being an
American. I wanted to do something, anything, to support my team.
Like so many others, I gave blood and donated money to the Red
Cross. I was more open and helpful to strangers. And I wanted to
display my team membership by showing the ag in some way.
But I was a professor, and professors don’t do such things. Flag
waving and nationalism are for conservatives. Professors are liberal
globetrotting universalists, re exively wary of saying that their
nation is better than other nations.1 When you see an American ag
on a car in a UVA sta parking lot, you can bet that the car belongs
to a secretary or a blue-collar worker.
After three days and a welter of feelings I’d never felt before, I
found a solution to my dilemma. I put an American ag in one
corner of my rear windshield, and I put the United Nations ag in
the opposite corner. That way I could announce that I loved my
country, but don’t worry, folks, I don’t place it above other
countries, and this was, after all, an attack on the whole world, sort
of, right?

So far in this book I’ve painted a portrait of human nature that is
somewhat cynical. I’ve argued that Glaucon was right and that we
care more about looking good than about truly being good.2
Intuitions come rst, strategic reasoning second. We lie, cheat, and
cut ethical corners quite often when we think we can get away with
it, and then we use our moral thinking to manage our reputations
and justify ourselves to others. We believe our own post hoc
reasoning so thoroughly that we end up self-righteously convinced
of our own virtue.
I do believe that you can understand most of moral psychology by
viewing it as a form of enlightened self-interest, and if it’s selfinterest, then it’s easily explained by Darwinian natural selection
working at the level of the individual. Genes are sel sh,3 sel sh
genes create people with various mental modules, and some of
these mental modules make us strategically altruistic, not reliably
or universally altruistic. Our righteous minds were shaped by kin
selection plus reciprocal altruism augmented by gossip and
reputation management. That’s the message of nearly every book
on the evolutionary origins of morality, and nothing I’ve said so far
contradicts that message.
But in Part III of this book I’m going to show why that portrait is
incomplete. Yes, people are often sel sh, and a great deal of our
moral, political, and religious behavior can be understood as thinly
veiled ways of pursuing self-interest. (Just look at the awful
hypocrisy of so many politicians and religious leaders.) But it’s also
true that people are groupish. We love to join teams, clubs, leagues,
and fraternities. We take on group identities and work shoulder to
shoulder with strangers toward common goals so enthusiastically
that it seems as if our minds were designed for teamwork. I don’t
think we can understand morality, politics, or religion until we have
a good picture of human groupishness and its origins. We cannot
understand conservative morality and the Durkheimian societies I
described in the last chapter. Neither can we understand socialism,
communism, and the communalism of the left.
Let me be more precise. When I say that human nature is sel sh, I
mean that our minds contain a variety of mental mechanisms that

make us adept at promoting our own interests, in competition with
our peers. When I say that human nature is also groupish, I mean
that our minds contain a variety of mental mechanisms that make us
adept at promoting our group’s interests, in competition with other
groups.4 We are not saints, but we are sometimes good team
players.
Stated in this way, the origin of these groupish mechanisms
becomes a puzzle. Do we have groupish minds today because
groupish individuals long ago outcompeted less groupish individuals
within the same group? If so, then this is just standard, bread-andbutter natural selection operating at the level of the individual. And
if that’s the case, then this is Glauconian groupishness—we should
expect to nd that people care about the appearance of loyalty, not
the reality.5 Or do we have groupish mechanisms (such as the rallyround-the- ag re ex) because groups that succeeded in coalescing
and cooperating outcompeted groups that couldn’t get it together?
If so, then I’m invoking a process known as “group selection,” and
group selection was banished as a heresy from scienti c circles in
the 1970s.6
In this chapter I’ll argue that group selection was falsely
convicted and unfairly banished. I’ll present four pieces of new
evidence that I believe exonerate group selection (in some but not
all forms). This new evidence demonstrates the value of thinking
about groups as real entities that compete with each other. This new
evidence leads us directly to the third and nal principle of moral
psychology: Morality binds and blinds. I will suggest that human
nature is mostly sel sh, but with a groupish overlay that resulted
from the fact that natural selection works at multiple levels
simultaneously. Individuals compete with individuals, and that
competition rewards sel shness—which includes some forms of
strategic cooperation (even criminals can work together to further
their own interests).7 But at the same time, groups compete with
groups, and that competition favors groups composed of true team
players—those who are willing to cooperate and work for the good
of the group, even when they could do better by slacking, cheating,
or leaving the group.8 These two processes pushed human nature in

di erent directions and gave us the strange mix of sel shness and
sel essness that we know today.
VICTORIOUS TRIBES?
Here’s an example of one kind of group selection. In a few
remarkable pages of The Descent of Man, Darwin made the case for
group selection, raised the principal objection to it, and then
proposed a way around the objection:
When two tribes of primeval man, living in the same
country, came into competition, if (other circumstances
being equal) the one tribe included a great number of
courageous, sympathetic and faithful members, who
were always ready to warn each other of danger, to aid
and defend each other, this tribe would succeed better and
conquer the other.… The advantage which disciplined
soldiers have over undisciplined hordes follows chie y
from the con dence which each man feels in his
comrades.… Sel sh and contentious people will not cohere,
and without coherence nothing can be e ected. A tribe rich
in the above qualities would spread and be victorious over
other tribes.9
Cohesive tribes began to function like individual organisms,
competing with other organisms. The tribes that were more
cohesive generally won. Natural selection therefore worked on
tribes the same way it works on every other organism.
But in the very next paragraph, Darwin raised the free rider
problem, which is still the main objection raised against group
selection:
But it may be asked, how within the limits of the same
tribe did a large number of members rst become
endowed with these social and moral qualities, and how
was the standard of excellence raised? It is extremely

doubtful whether the o spring of the more sympathetic and
benevolent parents, or of those who were the most faithful to
their comrades, would be reared in greater numbers than the
children of sel sh and treacherous parents belonging to the
same tribe. He who was ready to sacri ce his life, as
many a savage has been, rather than betray his
comrades, would often leave no o spring to inherit his
noble nature.10
Darwin grasped the basic logic of what is now known as multilevel
selection.11 Life is a hierarchy of nested levels, like Russian dolls:
genes within chromosomes within cells within individual organisms
within hives, societies, and other groups. There can be competition
at any level of the hierarchy, but for our purposes (studying
morality) the only two levels that matter are those of the individual
organism and the group. When groups compete, the cohesive,
cooperative group usually wins. But within each group, sel sh
individuals (free riders) come out ahead. They share in the group’s
gains while contributing little to its e orts. The bravest army wins,
but within the bravest army, the few cowards who hang back are
the most likely of all to survive the ght, go home alive, and
become fathers.
Multilevel selection refers to a way of quantifying how strong the
selection pressure is at each level, which means how strongly the
competition of life favors genes for particular traits.12 A gene for
suicidal self-sacri ce would be favored by group-level selection (it
would help the team win), but it would be so strongly opposed by
selection at the individual level that such a trait could evolve only
in species such as bees, where competition within the hive has been
nearly eliminated and almost all selection is group selection.13 Bees
(and ants and termites) are the ultimate team players: one for all,
all for one, all the time, even if that means dying to protect the hive
from invaders.14 (Humans can be turned into suicide bombers, but it
takes a great deal of training, pressure, and psychological
manipulation. It doesn’t come naturally to us.)15

Once human groups had some minimal ability to band together
and compete with other groups, then group-level selection came
into play and the most groupish groups had an advantage over
groups of sel sh individualists. But how did early humans get those
groupish abilities in the rst place? Darwin proposed a series of
“probable steps” by which humans evolved to the point where there
could be groups of team players in the rst place.
The rst step was the “social instincts.” In ancient times, loners
were more likely to get picked o by predators than were their
more gregarious siblings, who felt a strong need to stay close to the
group. The second step was reciprocity. People who helped others
were more likely to get help when they needed it most.
But the most important “stimulus to the development of the social
virtues” was the fact that people are passionately concerned with
“the praise and blame of our fellow-men.”16 Darwin, writing in
Victorian England, shared Glaucon’s view (from aristocratic Athens)
that people are obsessed with their reputations. Darwin believed
that the emotions that drive this obsession were acquired by natural
selection acting at the individual level: those who lacked a sense of
shame or a love of glory were less likely to attract friends and
mates. Darwin also added a nal step: the capacity to treat duties
and principles as sacred, which he saw as part of our religious
nature.
When you put these steps together, they take you along an
evolutionary path from earlier primates to humans, among whom
free riding is no longer so attractive. In a real army, which
sacralizes honor, loyalty, and country, the coward is not the most
likely to make it home and father children. He’s the most likely to
get beaten up, left behind, or shot in the back for committing
sacrilege. And if he does make it home alive, his reputation will
repel women and potential employers.17 Real armies, like most
e ective groups, have many ways of suppressing sel shness. And
anytime a group nds a way to suppress sel shness, it changes the
balance of forces in a multilevel analysis: individual-level selection
becomes less important, and group-level selection becomes more
powerful. For example, if there is a genetic basis for feelings of

loyalty and sanctity (i.e., the Loyalty and Sanctity foundations),
then intense intergroup competition will make these genes become
more common in the next generation. The reason is that groups in
which these traits are common will replace groups in which they are
rare, even if these genes impose a small cost on their bearers
(relative to those that lack them within each group).
In what might be the pithiest and most prescient statement in the
history of moral psychology, Darwin summarized the evolutionary
origin of morality in this way:
Ultimately our moral sense or conscience becomes a
highly complex sentiment—originating in the social
instincts, largely guided by the approbation of our
fellow-men, ruled by reason, self-interest, and in later
times by deep religious feelings, and con rmed by
instruction and habit.18
Darwin’s response to the free rider problem satis ed readers for
nearly a hundred years, and group selection became a standard part
of evolutionary thinking. Unfortunately, most writers did not bother
to work out exactly how each particular species solved the free
rider problem, as Darwin had done for human beings. Claims about
animals behaving “for the good of the group” proliferated—for
example, the claim that individual animals restrain their grazing or
their breeding so as not to put the group at risk of overexploiting its
food supply. Even more lofty claims were made about animals
acting for the good of the species, or even of the ecosystem.19 These
claims were naive because individuals that followed the sel ess
strategy would leave fewer surviving o spring and would soon be
replaced in the population by the descendants of free riders.
In 1966, this loose thinking was brought to a halt, along with
almost all thinking about group selection.
A FAST HERD OF DEER?

In 1955, a young biologist named George Williams attended a
lecture at the University of Chicago by a termite specialist. The
speaker claimed that many animals are cooperative and helpful, just
like termites. He said that old age and death are the way that nature
makes room for the younger and tter members of each species. But
Williams was well versed in genetics and evolution, and he was
repulsed by the speaker’s Panglossian mushiness. He saw that
animals are not going to die to bene t others, except in very special
circumstances such as those that prevail in a termite nest (where all
are sisters). He set out to write a book that would “purge biology”
of such sloppy thinking once and for all.20
In Adaptation and Natural Selection (published in 1966), Williams
told biologists how to think clearly about adaptation. He saw
natural selection as a design process. There’s no conscious or
intelligent designer, but Williams found the language of design
useful nonetheless.21 For example, wings can only be understood as
biological mechanisms designed to produce ight. Williams noted
that adaptation at a given level always implies a selection (design)
process operating at that level, and he warned readers not to look
to higher levels (such as groups) when selection e ects at lower
levels (such as individuals) can fully explain the trait.
He worked through the example of running speed in deer. When
deer run in a herd, we observe a fast herd of deer, moving as a unit
and sometimes changing course as a unit. We might be tempted to
explain the herd’s behavior by appealing to group selection: for
millions of years, faster herds have escaped predators better than
slower herds, and so over time fast herds replaced slower herds. But
Williams pointed out that deer have been exquisitely well designed
as individuals to ee from predators. The selection process operated
at the level of individuals: slower deer got eaten, while their faster
cousins in the same herd escaped. There is no need to bring in
selection at the level of the herd. A fast herd of deer is nothing
more than a herd of fast deer.22
Williams gave an example of what it would take to force us up to
a group-level analysis: behavioral mechanisms whose goal or
function was clearly the protection of the group, rather than the

individual. If deer with particularly keen senses served as sentinels,
while the fastest runners in the herd tried to lure predators away
from the herd, we’d have evidence of group-related adaptations,
and, as Williams put it, “only by a theory of between-group
selection could we achieve a scienti c explanation of group-related
adaptations.”23
Williams said that group selection was possible in theory. But
then he devoted most of the book to proving his thesis that “grouprelated adaptations do not in fact exist.”24 He gave examples from
across the animal kingdom, showing in every case that what looks
like altruism or self-sacri ce to a naive biologist (such as that
termite specialist) turns out to be either individual sel shness or kin
selection (whereby costly actions make sense because they bene t
other copies of the same genes in closely related individuals, as
happens with termites). Richard Dawkins did the same thing in his
1976 best seller The Sel sh Gene, granting that group selection is
possible but then debunking apparent cases of group-related
adaptations. By the late 1970s there was a strong consensus that
anyone who said that a behavior occurred “for the good of the
group” was a fool who could be safely ignored.
We sometimes look back on the 1970s as the “me decade.” That
term was rst applied to the growing individualism of American
society, but it describes a broad set of changes in the social sciences
as well. The idea of people as Homo economicus spread far and
wide. In social psychology, for example, the leading explanation of
fairness (known as “equity theory”) was based on four axioms, the
rst of which was “Individuals will try to maximize their
outcomes.” The authors then noted that “even the most contentious
scientist would nd it di cult to challenge our rst proposition.
Theories in a wide variety of disciplines rest on the assumption that
‘man is sel sh.’ ”25 All acts of apparent altruism, cooperation, and
even simple fairness had to be explained, ultimately, as covert
forms of self-interest.26

Of course, real life is full of cases that violate the axiom. People
leave tips in restaurants they’ll never return to; they donate
anonymously to charities; they sometimes drown after jumping into
rivers to save children who are not their own. No problem, said the
cynics; these are just mis rings of ancient systems designed for life
in the small groups of the Pleistocene, where most people were
close kin.27 Now that we live in large anonymous societies, our
ancient sel sh circuits erroneously lead us to help strangers who
will not help us in return. Our “moral qualities” are not adaptations,
as Darwin had believed. They are by-products; they are mistakes.
Morality, said Williams, is “an accidental capability produced, in its
boundless stupidity, by a biological process that is normally
opposed to the expression of such a capability.”28 Dawkins shared
this cynicism: “Let us try to teach generosity and altruism because
we are born sel sh.”29
I disagree. Human beings are the gira es of altruism. We’re oneof-a-kind freaks of nature who occasionally—even if rarely—can be
as sel ess and team-spirited as bees.30 If your moral ideal is the
person who devotes her life to helping strangers, well then, OK—
such people are so rare that we send lm crews out to record them
for the evening news. But if you focus, as Darwin did, on behavior
in groups of people who know each other and share goals and
values, then our ability to work together, divide labor, help each
other, and function as a team is so all-pervasive that we don’t even
notice it. You’ll never see the headline “Forty- ve Unrelated
College Students Work Together Cooperatively, and for No Pay, to
Prepare for Opening Night of Romeo and Juliet.”
When Williams proposed his fanciful example of deer dividing
labor and working together to protect the herd, was it not obvious
that human groups do exactly that? By his own criterion, if people
in every society readily organize themselves into cooperative
groups with a clear division of labor, then this ability is an excellent
candidate for being a group-related adaptation. As Williams himself
put it: “Only by a theory of between-group selection could we
achieve a scienti c explanation of group-related adaptations.”

The 9/11 attacks activated several of these group-related
adaptations in my mind. The attacks turned me into a team player,
with a powerful and unexpected urge to display my team’s ag and
then do things to support the team, such as giving blood, donating
money, and, yes, supporting the leader.31 And my response was
tepid compared to the hundreds of Americans who got in their cars
that afternoon and drove great distances to New York in the vain
hope that they could help to dig survivors out of the wreckage, or
the thousands of young people who volunteered for military service
in the following weeks. Were these people acting on sel sh
motives, or groupish motives?
The rally-round-the- ag re ex is just one example of a groupish
mechanism.32 It is exactly the sort of mental mechanism you’d
expect to nd if we humans were shaped by group selection in the
way that Darwin described. I can’t be certain, however, that this
re ex really did evolve by group-level selection. Group selection is
controversial among evolutionary theorists, most of whom still
agree with Williams that group selection never actually happened
among humans. They think that anything that looks like a grouprelated adaptation will—if you look closely enough—turn out to be
an adaptation for helping individuals outcompete their neighbors
within the same group, not an adaptation for helping groups
outcompete other groups.
Before we can move on with our exploration of morality, politics,
and religion, we’ve got to address this problem. If the experts are
divided, then why should we side with those who believe that
morality is (in part) a group-related adaptation?33
In the following sections I’ll give you four reasons. I’ll show you
four “exhibits” in my defense of multilevel selection (which includes
group selection). But my goal here is not just to build a legal case in
an academic battle that you might care nothing about. My goal is to
show you that morality is the key to understanding humanity. I’ll
take you on a brief tour of humanity’s origins in which we’ll see
how groupishness helped us transcend sel shness. I’ll show that our

groupishness—despite all of the ugly and tribal things it makes us
do—is one of the magic ingredients that made it possible for
civilizations to burst forth, cover the Earth, and live ever more
peacefully in just a few thousand years.34
EXHIBIT A: MAJOR TRANSITIONS IN EVOLUTION
Suppose you entered a boat race. One hundred rowers, each in a
separate rowboat, set out on a ten-mile race along a wide and slowmoving river. The rst to cross the nish line will win $10,000.
Halfway into the race, you’re in the lead. But then, from out of
nowhere, you’re passed by a boat with two rowers, each pulling just
one oar. No fair! Two rowers joined together into one boat! And
then, stranger still, you watch as that rowboat is overtaken by a
train of three such rowboats, all tied together to form a single long
boat. The rowers are identical septuplets. Six of them row in perfect
synchrony while the seventh is the coxswain, steering the boat and
calling out the beat for the rowers. But those cheaters are deprived
of victory just before they cross the nish line, for they in turn are
passed by an enterprising group of twenty-four sisters who rented a
motorboat. It turns out that there are no rules in this race about
what kinds of vehicles are allowed.
That was a metaphorical history of life on Earth. For the rst
billion years or so of life, the only organisms were prokaryotic cells
(such as bacteria). Each was a solo operation, competing with
others and reproducing copies of itself.
But then, around 2 billion years ago, two bacteria somehow
joined together inside a single membrane, which explains why
mitochondria have their own DNA, unrelated to the DNA in the
nucleus.35 These are the two-person rowboats in my example. Cells
that had internal organelles could reap the bene ts of cooperation
and the division of labor (see Adam Smith). There was no longer
any competition between these organelles, for they could reproduce
only when the entire cell reproduced, so it was “one for all, all for
one.” Life on Earth underwent what biologists call a “major

transition.”36 Natural selection went on as it always had, but now
there was a radically new kind of creature to be selected. There was
a new kind of vehicle by which sel sh genes could replicate
themselves. Single-celled eukaryotes were wildly successful and
spread throughout the oceans.
A few hundred million years later, some of these eukaryotes
developed a novel adaptation: they stayed together after cell
division to form multicellular organisms in which every cell had
exactly the same genes. These are the three-boat septuplets in my
example. Once again, competition is suppressed (because each cell
can only reproduce if the organism reproduces, via its sperm or egg
cells). A group of cells becomes an individual, able to divide labor
among the cells (which specialize into limbs and organs). A
powerful new kind of vehicle appears, and in a short span of time
the world is covered with plants, animals, and fungi.37 It’s another
major transition.
Major transitions are rare. The biologists John Maynard Smith
and Eörs Szathmáry count just eight clear examples over the last 4
billion years (the last of which is human societies).38 But these
transitions are among the most important events in biological
history, and they are examples of multilevel selection at work. It’s
the same story over and over again: Whenever a way is found to
suppress free riding so that individual units can cooperate, work as
a team, and divide labor, selection at the lower level becomes less
important, selection at the higher level becomes more powerful,
and that higher-level selection favors the most cohesive
superorganisms.39 (A superorganism is an organism made out of
smaller organisms.) As these superorganisms proliferate, they begin
to compete with each other, and to evolve for greater success in
that competition. This competition among superorganisms is one
form of group selection.40 There is variation among the groups, and
the ttest groups pass on their traits to future generations of
groups.
Major transitions may be rare, but when they happen, the Earth
often changes.41 Just look at what happened more than 100 million
years ago when some wasps developed the trick of dividing labor

between a queen (who lays all the eggs) and several kinds of
workers who maintain the nest and bring back food to share. This
trick was discovered by the early hymenoptera (members of the
order that includes wasps, which gave rise to bees and ants) and it
was discovered independently several dozen other times (by the
ancestors of termites, naked mole rats, and some species of shrimp,
aphids, beetles, and spiders).42 In each case, the free rider problem
was surmounted and sel sh genes began to craft relatively sel ess
group members who together constituted a supremely sel sh group.
These groups were a new kind of vehicle: a hive or colony of
close genetic relatives, which functioned as a unit (e.g., in foraging
and ghting) and reproduced as a unit. These are the motorboating
sisters in my example, taking advantage of technological
innovations and mechanical engineering that had never before
existed. It was another transition. Another kind of group began to
function as though it were a single organism, and the genes that got
to ride around in colonies crushed the genes that couldn’t “get it
together” and rode around in the bodies of more sel sh and solitary
insects. The colonial insects represent just 2 percent of all insect
species, but in a short period of time they claimed the best feeding
and breeding sites for themselves, pushed their competitors to
marginal grounds, and changed most of the Earth’s terrestrial
ecosystems (for example, by enabling the evolution of owering
plants, which need pollinators).43 Now they’re the majority, by
weight, of all insects on Earth.
What about human beings? Since ancient times, people have
likened human societies to beehives. But is this just a loose
analogy? If you map the queen of the hive onto the queen or king
of a city-state, then yes, it’s loose. A hive or colony has no ruler, no
boss. The queen is just the ovary. But if we simply ask whether
humans went through the same evolutionary process as bees—a
major transition from sel sh individualism to groupish hives that
prosper when they nd a way to suppress free riding—then the
analogy gets much tighter.
Many animals are social: they live in groups, ocks, or herds. But
only a few animals have crossed the threshold and become

ultrasocial, which means that they live in very large groups that
have some internal structure, enabling them to reap the bene ts of
the division of labor.44 Beehives and ant nests, with their separate
castes of soldiers, scouts, and nursery attendants, are examples of
ultrasociality, and so are human societies.
One of the key features that has helped all the nonhuman ultrasocials to cross over appears to be the need to defend a shared nest.
The biologists Bert Hölldobler and E. O. Wilson summarize the
recent nding that ultrasociality (also called “eusociality”)45 is
found among a few species of shrimp, aphids, thrips, and beetles, as
well as among wasps, bees, ants, and termites:
In all the known [species that] display the earliest stages
of eusociality, their behavior protects a persistent,
defensible resource from predators, parasites, or
competitors. The resource is invariably a nest plus
dependable food within foraging range of the nest
inhabitants.46
Hölldobler and Wilson give supporting roles to two other factors:
the need to feed o spring over an extended period (which gives an
advantage to species that can recruit siblings or males to help out
Mom) and intergroup con ict. All three of these factors applied to
those rst early wasps camped out together in defensible naturally
occurring nests (such as holes in trees). From that point on, the
most cooperative groups got to keep the best nesting sites, which
they then modi ed in increasingly elaborate ways to make
themselves even more productive and more protected. Their
descendants include the honeybees we know today, whose hives
have been described as “a factory inside a fortress.”47
Those same three factors applied to human beings. Like bees, our
ancestors were (1) territorial creatures with a fondness for
defensible nests (such as caves) who (2) gave birth to needy
o spring that required enormous amounts of care, which had to be
given while (3) the group was under threat from neighboring
groups. For hundreds of thousands of years, therefore, conditions

were in place that pulled for the evolution of ultrasociality, and as a
result, we are the only ultrasocial primate. The human lineage may
have started o acting very much like chimps,48 but by the time our
ancestors started walking out of Africa, they had become at least a
little bit like bees.
And much later, when some groups began planting crops and
orchards, and then building granaries, storage sheds, fenced
pastures, and permanent homes, they had an even steadier food
supply that had to be defended even more vigorously. Like bees,
humans began building ever more elaborate nests, and in just a few
thousand years, a new kind of vehicle appeared on Earth—the citystate, able to raise walls and armies.49 City-states and, later,
empires spread rapidly across Eurasia, North Africa, and
Mesoamerica, changing many of the Earth’s ecosystems and
allowing the total tonnage of human beings to shoot up from
insigni cance at the start of the Holocene (around twelve thousand
years ago) to world domination today.50 As the colonial insects did
to the other insects, we have pushed all other mammals to the
margins, to extinction, or to servitude. The analogy to bees is not
shallow or loose. Despite their many di erences, human
civilizations and beehives are both products of major transitions in
evolutionary history. They are motorboats.
The discovery of major transitions is Exhibit A in the retrial of
group selection. Group selection may or may not be common among
other animals, but it happens whenever individuals nd ways to
suppress sel shness and work as a team, in competition with other
teams.51 Group selection creates group-related adaptations. It is not
far-fetched, and it should not be a heresy to suggest that this is how
we got the groupish overlay that makes up a crucial part of our
righteous minds.
EXHIBIT B: SHARED INTENTIONALITY
In 49 BCE, Gaius Julius made the momentous decision to cross the
Rubicon, a shallow river in northern Italy. He broke Roman law

(which forbade generals to approach Rome with their armies),
started a civil war, and became Julius Caesar, the absolute ruler of
Rome. He also gave us a metaphor for any small action that sets in
motion an unstoppable train of events with momentous
consequences.
It’s great fun to look back at history and identify Rubicon
crossings. I used to believe that there were too many small steps in
the evolution of morality to identify one as the Rubicon, but I
changed my mind when I heard Michael Tomasello, one of the
world’s foremost experts on chimpanzee cognition, utter this
sentence: “It is inconceivable that you would ever see two
chimpanzees carrying a log together.”52
I was stunned. Chimps are arguably the second-smartest species
on the planet, able to make tools, learn sign language, predict the
intentions of other chimps, and deceive each other to get what they
want. As individuals, they’re brilliant. So why can’t they work
together? What are they missing?
Tomasello’s great innovation was to create a set of simple tasks
that could be given to chimps and to human toddlers in nearly
identical form.53 Solving the task earned the chimp or child a treat
(usually a piece of food for the chimp, a small toy for the child).
Some of the tasks required thinking only about physical objects in
physical space—for example, using a stick to pull in a treat that was
out of reach, or choosing the dish that had the larger number of
treats in it rather than the smaller number. Across all ten tasks, the
chimps and the two-year-olds did equally well, solving the problems
correctly about 68 percent of the time.
But other tasks required collaborating with the experimenter, or
at least recognizing that she intended to share information. For
example, in one task, the experimenter demonstrated how to
remove a treat from a clear tube by poking a hole in the paper that
covered one end, and then she gave an identical tube to the chimp
or child. Would the subjects understand that the experimenter was
trying to teach them what to do? In another task, the experimenter
hid the treat under one of two cups and then tried to show the
chimp or child the correct cup (by looking at it or pointing to it).

The kids aced these social challenges, solving them correctly 74
percent of the time. The chimps bombed, solving them just 35
percent of the time (no better than chance on many of the tasks).
According to Tomasello, human cognition veered away from that
of other primates when our ancestors developed shared
intentionality.54 At some point in the last million years, a small
group of our ancestors developed the ability to share mental
representations of tasks that two or more of them were pursuing
together. For example, while foraging, one person pulls down a
branch while the other plucks the fruit, and they both share the
meal. Chimps never do this. Or while hunting, the pair splits up to
approach an animal from both sides. Chimps sometimes appear to
do this, as in the widely reported cases of chimps hunting colobus
monkeys,55 but Tomasello argues that the chimps are not really
working together. Rather, each chimp is surveying the scene and
then taking the action that seems best to him at that moment.56
Tomasello notes that these monkey hunts are the only time that
chimps seem to be working together, yet even in these rare cases
they fail to show the signs of real cooperation. They make no e ort
to communicate with each other, for example, and they are terrible
at sharing the spoils among the hunters, each of whom must use
force to obtain a share of meat at the end. They all chase the
monkey at the same time, yet they don’t all seem to be on the same
page about the hunt.
In contrast, when early humans began to share intentions, their
ability to hunt, gather, raise children, and raid their neighbors
increased exponentially. Everyone on the team now had a mental
representation of the task, knew that his or her partners shared the
same representation, knew when a partner had acted in a way that
impeded success or that hogged the spoils, and reacted negatively to
such violations. When everyone in a group began to share a
common understanding of how things were supposed to be done,
and then felt a ash of negativity when any individual violated
those expectations, the rst moral matrix was born.57 (Remember
that a matrix is a consensual hallucination.) That, I believe, was our
Rubicon crossing.

Tomasello believes that human ultrasociality arose in two steps.
The rst was the ability to share intentions in groups of two or
three people who were actively hunting or foraging together. (That
was the Rubicon.) Then, after several hundred thousand years of
evolution for better sharing and collaboration as nomadic huntergatherers, more collaborative groups began to get larger, perhaps in
response to the threat of other groups. Victory went to the most
cohesive groups—the ones that could scale up their ability to share
intentions from three people to three hundred or three thousand
people. This was the second step: Natural selection favored
increasing levels of what Tomasello calls “group-mindedness”—the
ability to learn and conform to social norms, feel and share grouprelated emotions, and, ultimately, to create and obey social
institutions, including religion. A new set of selection pressures
operated within groups (e.g., nonconformists were punished, or at
very least were less likely to be chosen as partners for joint
ventures)58 as well as between groups (cohesive groups took
territory and other resources from less cohesive groups).
Shared intentionality is Exhibit B in the retrial of group selection.
Once you grasp Tomasello’s deep insight, you begin to see the vast
webs of shared intentionality out of which human groups are
constructed. Many people assume that language was our Rubicon,
but language became possible only after our ancestors got shared
intentionality. Tomasello notes that a word is not a relationship
between a sound and an object. It is an agreement among people
who share a joint representation of the things in their world, and
who share a set of conventions for communicating with each other
about those things. If the key to group selection is a shared
defensible nest, then shared intentionality allowed humans to
construct nests that were vast and ornate yet weightless and
portable. Bees construct hives out of wax and wood bers, which
they then ght, kill, and die to defend. Humans construct moral
communities out of shared norms, institutions, and gods that, even
in the twenty- rst century, they ght, kill, and die to defend.

EXHIBIT C: GENES AND CULTURES COEVOLVE
When did our ancestors cross the Rubicon? We’ll never know when
the rst pair of foragers worked as a team to pluck gs from a tree,
but when we begin to see signs in the fossil record of cultural
innovations accumulating and building on earlier innovations, we
can guess that the innovators had crossed over. When culture
accumulates, it means that people are learning from each other,
adding their own innovations, and then passing their ideas on to
later generations.59
Our ancestors rst began to diverge from the common ancestor
we share with chimps and bonobos between 5 million and 7 million
years ago. For the next few million years, there were many species
of hominids walking around on two legs in Africa. But judging from
their brain size and their limited use of tools, these creatures
(including australopithecines such as “Lucy”) are better thought of
as bipedal apes than as early humans.60
Then, beginning around 2.4 million years ago, hominids with
larger brains begin to appear in the fossil record. These were the
rst members of the genus Homo, including Homo habilis, so named
because these creatures were “handy men” compared to their
ancestors. They left behind a profusion of simple stone tools known
as the Oldowan tool kit. These tools, mostly just sharp akes they
had knocked o larger stones, helped Homo habilis to cut and scrape
meat o carcasses killed by other animals. Homo habilis was not
much of a hunter.

9.1. Time line of major events in human evolution. MYA =
million years ago; KYA = thousand years ago. Dates drawn from
Potts and Sloan 2010; Richerson and Boyd 2005; and Tattersall
2009.
FIGURE

Then, beginning around 1.8 million years ago, some hominids in
East Africa began making new and more nely crafted tools, known
as the Acheulean tool kit.61 The main tool was a teardrop-shaped
hand axe, and its symmetry and careful crafting jump out at us as
something new under the sun, something made by minds like ours
(see gure 9.2). This seems like a promising place to start talking
about cumulative culture. But here’s the weird thing: Acheulean
tools are nearly identical everywhere, from Africa to Europe to
Asia, for more than a million years. There’s hardly any variation,
which suggests that the knowledge of how to make these tools may
not have been passed on culturally. Rather, the knowledge of how
to make these tools may have become innate, just as the
“knowledge” of how to build a dam is innate in beavers.62
It’s only around 600,000 or 700,000 years ago that we begin to
see creatures who may have crossed over. The rst hominids with
brains as large as ours begin appearing in Africa and then Europe.

FIGURE

9.2. Acheulean hand axe. (photo credit 9.1)

They are known collectively as Homo heidelbergensis, and they
were the ancestors of Neanderthals as well as of us. At their
campsites we nd the rst clear evidence of hearths, and of spears.
The oldest known spears were just sharpened sticks, but later they
became sharp stone points attached to wooden shafts and balanced
for accurate throwing. These people made complex weapons and
then worked together to hunt and kill large animals, which they
brought back to a central campsite to be butchered, cooked, and
shared.63
Homo heidelbergensis is therefore our best candidate for Rubicon
crosser.64 These people had cumulative culture, teamwork, and a
division of labor. They must have had shared intentionality,
including at least some rudimentary moral matrix that helped them
work together and then share the fruits of their labor. By crossing
over, they transformed not just the course of human evolution but
the very nature of the evolutionary process. From that point
onward, people lived in an environment that was increasingly of
their own making.
The anthropologists Pete Richerson and Rob Boyd have argued
that cultural innovations (such as spears, cooking techniques, and
religions) evolve in much the same way that biological innovations
evolve, and the two streams of evolution are so intertwined that
you can’t study one without studying both.65 For example, one of
the best-understood cases of gene-culture coevolution occurred

among the rst people who domesticated cattle. In humans, as in all
other mammals, the ability to digest lactose (the sugar in milk) is
lost during childhood. The gene that makes lactase (the enzyme that
breaks down lactose) shuts o after a few years of service, because
mammals don’t drink milk after they are weaned. But those rst
cattle keepers, in northern Europe and in a few parts of Africa, had
a vast new supply of fresh milk, which could be given to their
children but not to adults. Any individual whose mutated genes
delayed the shutdown of lactase production had an advantage. Over
time, such people left more milk-drinking descendants than did their
lactose-intolerant cousins. (The gene itself has been identi ed.)66
Genetic changes then drove cultural innovations as well: groups
with the new lactase gene then kept even larger herds, and found
more ways to use and process milk, such as turning it into cheese.
These cultural innovations then drove further genetic changes, and
on and on it went.
If cultural innovations (such as keeping cattle) can lead to genetic
responses (such as adult lactose tolerance), then might cultural
innovations related to morality have led to genetic responses as
well? Yes. Richerson and Boyd argue that gene-culture coevolution
helped to move humanity up from the small-group sociability of
other primates to the tribal ultrasociality that is found today in all
human societies.67
According to their “tribal instincts hypothesis,” human groups
have always been in competition to some degree with neighboring
groups. The groups that gured out (or stumbled upon) cultural
innovations that helped them cooperate and cohere in groups larger
than the family tended to win these competitions (just as Darwin
said).
Among the most important such innovations is the human love of
using symbolic markers to show our group memberships. From the
tattoos and face piercings used among Amazonian tribes through the
male circumcision required of Jews to the tattoos and facial
piercings used by punks in the United Kingdom, human beings take
extraordinary, costly, and sometimes painful steps to make their
bodies advertise their group memberships. This practice surely

started modestly, perhaps just with colored powders for body
painting.68 But however it began, groups that built on it and
invented more permanent markers found a way to forge a sense of
“we” that extended beyond kinship. We trust and cooperate more
readily with people who look and sound like us.69 We expect them
to share our values and norms.
And once some groups developed the cultural innovation of
prototribalism, they changed the environment within which genetic
evolution took place. As Richerson and Boyd explain:
Such environments favored the evolution of a suite of
new social instincts suited to life in such groups,
including a psychology which “expects” life to be
structured by moral norms and is designed to learn and
internalize such norms; new emotions such as shame and
guilt, which increase the chance that the norms are
followed, and a psychology which “expects” the social
world to be divided into symbolically marked groups.70
In such prototribal societies, individuals who found it harder to
play along, to restrain their antisocial impulses, and to conform to
the most important collective norms would not have been anyone’s
top choice when it came time to choose partners for hunting,
foraging, or mating. In particular, people who were violent would
have been shunned, punished, or in extreme cases killed.
This process has been described as “self-domestication.”71 The
ancestors of dogs, cats, and pigs got less aggressive as they were
domesticated and shaped for partnership with human beings. Only
the friendliest ones approached human settlements in the rst place;
they volunteered to become the ancestors of today’s pets and farm
animals.
In a similar way, early humans domesticated themselves when
they began to select friends and partners based on their ability to
live within the tribe’s moral matrix. In fact, our brains, bodies, and
behavior show many of the same signs of domestication that are
found in our domestic animals: smaller teeth, smaller body, reduced

aggression, and greater playfulness, carried on even into
adulthood.72 The reason is that domestication generally takes traits
that disappear at the end of childhood and keeps them turned on for
life. Domesticated animals (including humans) are more childlike,
sociable, and gentle than their wild ancestors.
These tribal instincts are a kind of overlay, a set of groupish
emotions and mental mechanisms laid down over our older and
more sel sh primate nature.73 It may sound depressing to think that
our righteous minds are basically tribal minds, but consider the
alternative. Our tribal minds make it easy to divide us, but without
our long period of tribal living there’d be nothing to divide in the
rst place. There’d be only small families of foragers—not nearly as
sociable as today’s hunter-gatherers—eking out a living and losing
most of their members to starvation during every prolonged
drought. The coevolution of tribal minds and tribal cultures didn’t
just prepare us for war; it also prepared us for far more peaceful
coexistence within our groups, and, in modern times, for
cooperation on a vast scale as well.
Gene-culture coevolution is Exhibit C in the retrial of group
selection. Once our ancestors crossed the Rubicon and became
cumulatively cultural creatures, their genes began to coevolve with
their cultural innovations. At least some of these innovations were
directed at marking members of a moral community, fostering
group cohesion, suppressing aggression and free riding within the
group, and defending the territory shared by that moral community.
These are precisely the sorts of changes that make major transitions
happen.74 Even if group selection played no role in the evolution of
any other mammal,75 human evolution has been so di erent since
the arrival of shared intentionality and gene-culture coevolution
that humans may well be a special case. The wholesale dismissal of
group selection in the 1960s and 1970s, based mostly on arguments
and examples from other species, was premature.
EXHIBIT D: EVOLUTION CAN BE FAST

When exactly did we become ultrasocial? Humans everywhere are
so groupish that most of the genetic changes must have been in
place before our ancestors spread out from Africa and the Middle
East around 50,000 years ago.76 (I suspect it was the development
of cooperative groupishness that enabled these ancestors to conquer
the world and take over Neanderthal territory so quickly.) But did
gene-culture coevolution stop at that point? Did our genes freeze in
place, leaving all later adaptation to be handled by cultural
innovation? For decades, many anthropologists and evolutionary
theorists said yes. In an interview in 2000, the paleontologist
Stephen Jay Gould said that “natural selection has almost become
irrelevant in human evolution” because cultural change works
“orders of magnitude” faster than genetic change. He next asserted
that “there’s been no biological change in humans in 40,000 or
50,000 years. Everything we call culture and civilization we’ve built
with the same body and brain.”77
If you believe Gould’s assertion that there’s been no biological
evolution in the last 50,000 years, then you’ll be most interested in
the Pleistocene era (the roughly 2 million years prior to the rise of
agriculture), and you’ll dismiss the Holocene (the last 12,000 years)
as irrelevant for understanding human evolution. But is 12,000
years really just an eye blink in evolutionary time? Darwin didn’t
think so; he wrote frequently about the e ects obtained by animal
and plant breeders in just a few generations.
The speed at which genetic evolution can occur is best illustrated
by an extraordinary study by Dmitri Belyaev, a Soviet scientist who
had been demoted in 1948 for his belief in Mendelian genetics.
(Soviet morality required the belief that traits acquired during one’s
lifetime could be passed on to one’s children.)78 Belyaev moved to a
Siberian research institute, where he decided to test his ideas by
conducting a simple breeding experiment with foxes. Rather than
selecting foxes based on the quality of their pelts, as fox breeders
would normally do, he selected them for tameness. Whichever fox
pups were least fearful of humans were bred to create the next
generation. Within just a few generations the foxes became tamer.
But more important, after nine generations, novel traits began to

appear in a few of the pups, and they were largely the same ones
that distinguish dogs from wolves. For example, patches of white
fur appeared on the head and chest; jaws and teeth shrank; and tails
formerly straight began to curl. After just thirty generations the
foxes had become so tame that they could be kept as pets. Lyudmila
Trut, a geneticist who had worked with Belyaev on the project and
who ran it after his death, described the foxes as “docile, eager to
please, and unmistakably domesticated.”79
It’s not just individual-level selection that is fast. A second study
done with chickens shows that group selection can produce equally
dramatic results. If you want to increase egg output, common sense
tells you to breed only the hens that lay the most eggs. But the
reality of the egg industry is that hens live crammed together into
cages, and the best laying hens tend to be the more aggressive,
dominant hens. Therefore, if you use individual selection (breeding
only the most productive hens), total productivity actually goes
down because aggressive behavior—including killing and
cannibalism—goes up.

9.3. Lyudmila Trut with Pavlik, a forty-second generation
decendant of Belyaev’s original study. (photo credit 9.2)

FIGURE

In the 1980s the geneticist William Muir used group selection to
get around this problem.80 He worked with cages containing twelve
hens each, and he simply picked the cages that produced the most
eggs in each generation. Then he bred all of the hens in those cages
to produce the next generation. Within just three generations,
aggression levels plummeted. By the sixth generation, the death
rate fell from the horri c baseline of 67 percent to a mere 8
percent. Total eggs produced per hen jumped from 91 to 237,
mostly because the hens started living longer, but also because they
laid more eggs per day. The group-selected hens were more
productive than were those subjected to individual-level selection.
They also actually looked like the pictures of chickens you see in
children’s books—plump and well-feathered, in contrast to the
battered, beaten-up, and partially defeathered hens that resulted
from individual-level selection.
Humans were probably never subjected to such a strong and
consistent selection pressure as were those foxes and hens, so it
would take more than six or ten generations to produce novel traits.
But how much longer? Can the human genome respond to new
selection pressures in, say, thirty generations (six hundred years)?
Or would it take more than ve hundred generations (ten thousand
years) for a new selection pressure to produce any genetic
adaptation?
The actual speed of genetic evolution is a question that can be
answered with data, and thanks to the Human Genome Project, we
now have that data. Several teams have sequenced the genomes of
thousands of people from every continent. Genes mutate and drift
through populations, but it is possible to distinguish such random
drift from cases in which genes are being “pulled” by natural
selection.81 The results are astonishing, and they are exactly the
opposite of Gould’s claim: genetic evolution greatly accelerated
during the last 50,000 years. The rate at which genes changed in
response to selection pressures began rising around 40,000 years

ago, and the curve got steeper and steeper after 20,000 years ago.
Genetic change reached a crescendo during the Holocene era, in
Africa as well as in Eurasia.
It makes perfect sense. In the last ten years, geneticists have
discovered just how active genes are. Genes are constantly turning
on and o in response to conditions such as stress, starvation, or
sickness. Now imagine these dynamic genes building vehicles
(people) who are hell-bent on exposing themselves to new climates,
predators, parasites, food options, social structures, and forms of
warfare. Imagine population densities skyrocketing during the
Holocene, so that there are more people putting more genetic
mutations into play. If genes and cultural adaptations coevolve in a
“swirling waltz” (as Richerson and Boyd put it), and if the cultural
partner suddenly starts dancing the jitterbug, the genes are going to
pick up the pace too.82 This is why genetic evolution kicked into
overdrive in the Holocene era, pulling along mutations such as the
lactose tolerance gene, or a gene that changed the blood of Tibetans
so that they could live at high altitudes.83 Genes for these recent
traits and dozens of others have already been identi ed.84 If genetic
evolution was able to ne-tune our bones, teeth, skin, and
metabolism in just a few thousand years as our diets and climates
changed, how could genetic evolution not have tinkered with our
brains and behaviors as our social environments underwent the
most radical transformation in primate history?
I don’t think evolution can create a new mental module from
scratch in just 12,000 years, but I can see no reason why existing
features—such as the six foundations I described in chapters 7 and
8, or the tendency to feel shame—would not be tweaked if
conditions changed and then stayed stable for a thousand years. For
example, when a society becomes more hierarchical or
entrepreneurial, or when a group takes up rice farming, herding, or
trade, these changes alter human relationships in many ways, and
reward very di erent sets of virtues.85 Cultural change would
happen very rapidly—the moral matrix constructed upon the six
foundations can change radically within a few generations. But if
that new moral matrix then stays somewhat steady for a few dozen

generations, new selection pressures will apply and there could be
some additional gene-culture coevolution.86
Fast evolution is Exhibit D in the retrial of group selection. If
genetic evolution can be fast, and if the human genome coevolves
with cultural innovations, then it becomes quite possible that human
nature was altered in just a few thousand years, somewhere in
Africa, by group selection during particularly harsh periods.
For example, the climate in Africa uctuated wildly between
70,000 and 140,000 years ago.87 With each swing from warmer to
cooler, or from wetter to drier, food sources changed and
widespread starvation was probably common. A catastrophic
volcanic eruption 74,000 years ago from the Toba volcano in
Indonesia may have dramatically changed the Earth’s climate within
a single year.88 Whatever the cause, we know that almost all
humans were killed o at some point during this time period. Every
person alive today is descended from just a few thousand people
who made it through one or more population bottlenecks.89
What was their secret? We’ll probably never know, but let’s
imagine that 95 percent of the food on Earth magically disappears
tonight, guaranteeing that almost all of us will starve to death
within two months. Law and order collapse. Chaos and mayhem
ensue. Who among us will still be alive a year from now? Will it be
the biggest, strongest, and most violent individuals in each town?
Or will it be the people who manage to work together in groups to
monopolize, hide, and share the remaining food supplies among
themselves?
Now imagine starvations like that occurring every few centuries,
and think about what a few such events would do to the human
gene pool. Even if group selection was con ned to just a few
thousand years, or to the longer period between 70,000 and
140,000 years ago, it could have given us the group-related
adaptations that allowed us to burst forth from Africa soon after the
bottleneck to conquer and populate the globe.90
IT’S NOT ALL ABOUT WAR

I’ve presented group selection so far in its simplest possible form:
groups compete with each other as if they were individual
organisms, and the most cohesive groups wipe out and replace the
less cohesive ones during intertribal warfare. That’s the way that
Darwin rst imagined it. But when the evolutionary psychologist
Lesley Newson read an early draft of this chapter, she sent me this
note:
I think it is important not to give readers the impression
that groups competing necessarily meant groups being at
war or ghting with one another. They were competing
to be the most e cient at turning resources into
o spring. Don’t forget that women and children were
also very important members of these groups.
Of course she’s right. Group selection does not require war or
violence. Whatever traits make a group more e cient at procuring
food and turning it into children makes that group more t than its
neighbors. Group selection pulls for cooperation, for the ability to
suppress antisocial behavior and spur individuals to act in ways that
bene t their groups. Group-serving behaviors sometimes impose a
terrible cost on outsiders (as in warfare). But in general,
groupishness is focused on improving the welfare of the in-group,
not on harming an out-group.
IN SUM
Darwin believed that morality was an adaptation that evolved by
natural selection operating at the individual level and at the group
level. Tribes with more virtuous members replaced tribes with more
sel sh members. But Darwin’s idea was banished from the academic
world when Williams and Dawkins argued that the free rider
problem dooms group selection. The sciences then entered a threedecade period during which competition between groups was
downplayed and everyone focused on competition among

individuals within groups. Seemingly altruistic acts had to be
explained as covert forms of sel shness.
But in recent years new scholarship has emerged that elevates the
role of groups in evolutionary thinking. Natural selection works at
multiple levels simultaneously, sometimes including groups of
organisms. I can’t say for sure that human nature was shaped by
group selection—there are scientists whose views I respect on both
sides of the debate. But as a psychologist studying morality, I can
say that multilevel selection would go a long way toward explaining
why people are simultaneously so sel sh and so groupish.91
There is a great deal of new scholarship since the 1970s that
compels us to think anew about group selection (as a part of
multilevel selection). I organized that scholarship into four
“exhibits” that collectively amount to a defense92 of group selection.
Exhibit A: Major transitions produce superorganisms. The
history of life on Earth shows repeated examples of
“major transitions.” When the free rider problem is
muted at one level of the biological hierarchy, larger and
more powerful vehicles (superorganisms) arise at the
next level up in the hierarchy, with new properties such
as a division of labor, cooperation, and altruism within
the group.
Exhibit B: Shared intentionality generates moral matrices.
The Rubicon crossing that let our ancestors function so
well in their groups was the emergence of the uniquely
human ability to share intentions and other mental
representations. This ability enabled early humans to
collaborate, divide labor, and develop shared norms for
judging each other’s behavior. These shared norms were
the beginning of the moral matrices that govern our
social lives today.
Exhibit C: Genes and cultures coevolve. Once our
ancestors crossed the Rubicon and began to share
intentions, our evolution became a two-stranded a air.
People created new customs, norms, and institutions that

altered the degree to which many groupish traits were
adaptive. In particular, gene-culture coevolution gave us
a set of tribal instincts: we love to mark group
membership, and then we cooperate preferentially with
members of our group.
Exhibit D: Evolution can be fast. Human evolution did
not stop or slow down 50,000 years ago. It sped up.
Gene-culture coevolution reached a fever pitch during
the last 12,000 years. We can’t just examine modern-day
hunter-gatherers and assume that they represent
universal human nature as it was locked into place
50,000 years ago. Periods of massive environmental
change (as occurred between 70,000 and 140,000 years
ago) and cultural change (as occurred during the
Holocene era) should gure more prominently in our
attempts to understand who we are, and how we got our
righteous minds.
Most of human nature was shaped by natural selection operating
at the level of the individual. Most, but not all. We have a few
group-related adaptations too, as many Americans discovered in the
days after 9/11. We humans have a dual nature—we are sel sh
primates who long to be a part of something larger and nobler than
ourselves. We are 90 percent chimp and 10 percent bee.93 If you
take that claim metaphorically, then the groupish and hivish things
that people do will make a lot more sense. It’s almost as though
there’s a switch in our heads that activates our hivish potential
when conditions are just right.

