TEN

The Hive Switch

In September 1941, William McNeill was drafted into the U.S.
Army. He spent several months in basic training, which consisted
mostly of marching around the drill eld in close formation with a
few dozen other men. At rst McNeill thought the marching was
just a way to pass the time, because his base had no weapons with
which to train. But after a few weeks, when his unit began to
synchronize well, he began to experience an altered state of
consciousness:
Words are inadequate to describe the emotion aroused
by the prolonged movement in unison that drilling
involved. A sense of pervasive well-being is what I
recall; more speci cally, a strange sense of personal
enlargement; a sort of swelling out, becoming bigger
than life, thanks to participation in collective ritual.1
McNeill fought in World War II and later became a distinguished
historian. His research led him to the conclusion that the key
innovation of Greek, Roman, and later European armies was the
sort of synchronous drilling and marching the army had forced him
to do years before. He hypothesized that the process of “muscular
bonding”—moving together in time—was a mechanism that evolved
long before the beginning of recorded history for shutting down the
self and creating a temporary superorganism. Muscular bonding
enabled people to forget themselves, trust each other, function as a
unit, and then crush less cohesive groups. Figure 10.1 shows the
superorganism that Alexander the Great used to defeat much larger
armies.

FIGURE

10.1. The Macedonian phalanx. (photo credit 10.1)

McNeill studied accounts of men in battle and found that men risk
their lives not so much for their country or their ideals as for their
comrades-in-arms. He quoted one veteran who gave this example of
what happens when “I” becomes “we”:
Many veterans who are honest with themselves will
admit, I believe, that the experience of communal e ort
in battle … has been the high point of their lives.…
Their “I” passes insensibly into a “we,” “my” becomes
“our,” and individual fate loses its central importance.…
I believe that it is nothing less than the assurance of
immortality that makes self sacri ce at these moments
so relatively easy.… I may fall, but I do not die, for that
which is real in me goes forward and lives on in the
comrades for whom I gave up my life. 2
THE HIVE HYPOTHESIS
In the last chapter, I suggested that human nature is 90 percent
chimp and 10 percent bee. We are like chimps in being primates

whose minds were shaped by the relentless competition of
individuals with their neighbors. We are descended from a long
string of winners in the game of social life. This is why we are
Glauconians, usually more concerned about the appearance of virtue
than the reality (as in Glaucon’s story about the ring of Gyges).3
But human nature also has a more recent groupish overlay. We
are like bees in being ultrasocial creatures whose minds were
shaped by the relentless competition of groups with other groups.
We are descended from earlier humans whose groupish minds
helped them cohere, cooperate, and outcompete other groups. That
doesn’t mean that our ancestors were mindless or unconditional
team players; it means they were selective. Under the right
conditions, they were able to enter a mind-set of “one for all, all for
one” in which they were truly working for the good of the group,
and not just for their own advancement within the group.
My hypothesis in this chapter is that human beings are conditional
hive creatures. We have the ability (under special conditions) to
transcend self-interest and lose ourselves (temporarily and
ecstatically) in something larger than ourselves. That ability is what
I’m calling the hive switch. The hive switch, I propose, is a grouprelated adaptation that can only be explained “by a theory of
between-group selection,” as Williams said.4 It cannot be explained
by selection at the individual level. (How would this strange ability
help a person to outcompete his neighbors in the same group?) The
hive switch is an adaptation for making groups more cohesive, and
therefore more successful in competition with other groups.5
If the hive hypothesis is true, then it has enormous implications
for how we should design organizations, study religion, and search
for meaning and joy in our lives.6 Is it true? Is there really a hive
switch?
COLLECTIVE EMOTIONS
When Europeans began to explore the world in the late fteenth
century, they brought back an extraordinary variety of plants and

animals. Each continent had its own wonders; the diversity of the
natural world was vast beyond imagination. But reports about the
inhabitants of these far- ung lands were, in some ways, more
uniform. European travelers to every continent witnessed people
coming together to dance with wild abandon around a re,
synchronized to the beat of drums, often to the point of exhaustion.
In Dancing in the Streets: A History of Collective Joy, Barbara
Ehrenreich describes how European explorers reacted to these
dances: with disgust. The masks, body paints, and guttural shrieks
made the dancers seem like animals. The rhythmically undulating
bodies and occasional sexual pantomimes were, to most Europeans,
degrading, grotesque, and thoroughly “savage.”
The Europeans were unprepared to understand what they were
seeing. As Ehrenreich argues, collective and ecstatic dancing is a
nearly universal “biotechnology” for binding groups together.7 She
agrees with McNeill that it is a form of muscular bonding. It fosters
love, trust, and equality. It was common in ancient Greece (think of
Dionysus and his cult) and in early Christianity (which she says was
a “danced” religion until dancing in church was suppressed in the
Middle Ages).
But if ecstatic dancing is so bene cial and so widespread, then
why did Europeans give it up? Ehrenreich’s historical explanation is
too nuanced to summarize here, but the last part of the story is the
rise of individualism and more re ned notions of the self in Europe,
beginning in the sixteenth century. These cultural changes
accelerated during the Enlightenment and the Industrial Revolution.
It is the same historical process that gave rise to WEIRD culture in
the nineteenth century (that is, Western, educated, industrialized,
rich, and democratic).8 As I said in chapter 5, the WEIRDer you are,
the more you perceive a world full of separate objects, rather than
relationships. The WEIRDer you are, the harder it is to understand
what those “savages” were doing.
Ehrenreich was surprised to discover how little help she could get
from psychology in her quest to understand collective joy.
Psychology has a rich language for describing relationships among
pairs of people, from eeting attractions to ego-dissolving love to

pathological obsession. But what about the love that can exist
among dozens of people? She notes that “if homosexual attraction is
the love that ‘dares not speak its name,’ the love that binds people
to the collective has no name at all to speak.”9
Among the few useful scholars she found in her quest was Emile
Durkheim. Durkheim insisted that there were “social facts” that
were not reducible to facts about individuals. Social facts—such as
the suicide rate or norms about patriotism—emerge as people
interact. They are just as real and worthy of study (by sociology) as
are people and their mental states (studied by psychology).
Durkheim didn’t know about multilevel selection and major
transitions theory, but his sociology ts uncannily well with both
ideas.
Durkheim frequently criticized his contemporaries, such as Freud,
who tried to explain morality and religion using only the
psychology of individuals and their pairwise relationships. (God is
just a father gure, said Freud.) Durkheim argued, in contrast, that
Homo sapiens was really Homo duplex, a creature who exists at two
levels: as an individual and as part of the larger society. From his
studies of religion he concluded that people have two distinct sets of
“social sentiments,” one for each level. The rst set of sentiments
“bind[s] each individual to the person of his fellow-citizens: these
are manifest within the community, in the day-to-day relationships
of life. These include the sentiments of honour, respect, a ection
and fear which we may feel towards one another.”10 These
sentiments are easily explained by natural selection operating at the
level of the individual: just as Darwin said, people avoid partners
who lack these sentiments.11
But Durkheim noted that people also had the capacity to
experience another set of emotions:
The second are those which bind me to the social entity
as a whole; these manifest themselves primarily in the
relationships of the society with other societies, and
could be called “inter-social.” The rst [set of emotions]
leave[s] my autonomy and personality almost intact. No

doubt they tie me to others, but without taking much of
my independence from me. When I act under the
in uence of the second, by contrast, I am simply a part of
a whole, whose actions I follow, and whose in uence I am
subject to.12
I nd it stunning that Durkheim invokes the logic of multilevel
selection, proposing that a new set of social sentiments exists to
help groups (which are real things) with their “inter-social”
relationships. These second-level sentiments ip the hive switch,
shut down the self, activate the groupish overlay, and allow the
person to become “simply a part of a whole.”
The most important of these Durkheimian higher-level sentiments
is “collective e ervescence,” which describes the passion and
ecstasy that group rituals can generate. As Durkheim put it:
The very act of congregating is an exceptionally
powerful stimulant. Once the individuals are gathered
together, a sort of electricity is generated from their
closeness and quickly launches them to an extraordinary
height of exaltation.13
In such a state, “the vital energies become hyperexcited, the
passions more intense, the sensations more powerful.”14 Durkheim
believed that these collective emotions pull humans fully but
temporarily into the higher of our two realms, the realm of the
sacred, where the self disappears and collective interests
predominate. The realm of the profane, in contrast, is the ordinary
day-to-day world where we live most of our lives, concerned about
wealth, health, and reputation, but nagged by the sense that there
is, somewhere, something higher and nobler.
Durkheim believed that our movements back and forth between
these two realms gave rise to our ideas about gods, spirits, heavens,
and the very notion of an objective moral order. These are social
facts that cannot be understood by psychologists studying

individuals (or pairs) any more than the structure of a beehive could
be deduced by entomologists examining lone bees (or pairs).
SO MANY WAYS TO FLIP THE SWITCH
Collective e ervescence sounds great, right? Too bad you need
twenty-three friends and a bon re to get it. Or do you? One of the
most intriguing facts about the hive switch is that there are many
ways to turn it on. Even if you doubt that the switch is a grouplevel adaptation, I hope you’ll agree with me that the switch exists,
and that it generally makes people less sel sh and more loving.
Here are three examples of switch ipping that you might have
experienced yourself.
1. Awe in Nature
In the 1830s, Ralph Waldo Emerson delivered a set of lectures on
nature that formed the foundation of American Transcendentalism,
a movement that rejected the analytic hyperintellectualism of
America’s top universities. Emerson argued that the deepest truths
must be known by intuition, not reason, and that experiences of
awe in nature were among the best ways to trigger such intuitions.
He described the rejuvenation and joy he gained from looking at the
stars, or at a vista of rolling farmland, or from a simple walk in the
woods:
Standing on the bare ground,—my head bathed by the
blithe air and uplifted into in nite space,—all mean
egotism vanishes. I become a transparent eye-ball; I am
nothing; I see all; the currents of the Universal Being
circulate through me; I am part or particle of God.15
Darwin records a similar experience in his autobiography:

In my journal I wrote that whilst standing in midst of the
grandeur of a Brazilian forest, “it is not possible to give
an adequate idea of the higher feelings of wonder,
admiration, and devotion which ll and elevate the
mind.” I well remember my conviction that there is
more in man than the breath of his body.16
Emerson and Darwin each found in nature a portal between the
realm of the profane and the realm of the sacred. Even if the hive
switch was originally a group-related adaptation, it can be ipped
when you’re alone by feelings of awe in nature, as mystics and
ascetics have known for millennia.
The emotion of awe is most often triggered when we face
situations with two features: vastness (something overwhelms us
and makes us feel small) and a need for accommodation (that is, our
experience is not easily assimilated into our existing mental
structures; we must “accommodate” the experience by changing
those structures).17 Awe acts like a kind of reset button: it makes
people forget themselves and their petty concerns. Awe opens
people to new possibilities, values, and directions in life. Awe is one
of the emotions most closely linked to the hive switch, along with
collective love and collective joy. People describe nature in spiritual
terms—as both Emerson and Darwin did—precisely because nature
can trigger the hive switch and shut down the self, making you feel
that you are simply a part of a whole.
2. Durkheimogens
When Cortés captured Mexico in 1519, he found the Aztecs
practicing a religion based on mushrooms containing the
hallucinogen psilocybin. The mushrooms were called teonanacatl—
literally “God’s esh” in the local language. The early Christian
missionaries noted the similarity of mushroom eating to the
Christian Eucharist, but the Aztec practice was more than a
symbolic ritual. Teonanacatl took people directly from the profane

to the sacred realm in about thirty minutes.18 Figure 10.2 shows a
god about to grab hold of a mushroom eater, from a sixteenthcentury Aztec scroll. Religious practices north of the Aztecs focused
on consumption of peyote, harvested from a cactus containing
mescaline. Religious practices south of the Aztecs focused on
consumption of ayahuasca (Quechua for “spirit vine”), a brew made
from vines and leaves containing DMT (dimethyltriptamine).
These three drugs are classed together as hallucinogens (along
with LSD and other synthetic compounds) because the class of
chemically similar alkaloids in such drugs induces a range of visual
and auditory hallucinations. But I think these drugs could just as
well be called Durkheimogens, given their unique (though
unreliable) ability to shut down the self and give people experiences
they later describe as “religious” or “transformative.”19
Most traditional societies have some sort of ritual for
transforming boys into men and girls into women. It’s usually far
more grueling than a bar mitzvah; it frequently involves fear, pain,
symbolism of death and rebirth, and a revelation of knowledge by
gods or elders.20 Many societies used hallucinogenic drugs to
catalyze this transformation. The drugs ip the hive switch and help
the sel sh child disappear. The person who returns from the other
world is then treated as a morally responsible adult. One
anthropological review of such rites concludes: “These states were
induced to heighten learning and to create a bonding among
members of the cohort group, when appropriate, so that individual
psychic needs would be subsumed to the needs of the social
group.”21

10.2. An Aztec mushroom eater, about to be whisked away to the
realm of the sacred. Detail from the Codex Magliabechiano,
CL.XIII.3, sixteenth century. (photo credit 10.2)

FIGURE

When Westerners take these drugs, shorn of all rites and rituals,
they don’t usually commit to any group, but they often have
experiences that are hard to distinguish from the “peak experiences”
described by the humanistic psychologist Abe Maslow.22 In one of
the few controlled experiments, done before the drugs were made
illegal in most Western countries, twenty divinity students were
brought together in the basement chapel of a church in Boston.23 All
took a pill, but for the rst twenty minutes, nobody knew who had
taken psilocybin and who had taken niacin (a B vitamin that gives
people a warm, ushed feeling). But by forty minutes into the
experiment, it was clear to all. The ten who took niacin (and who
had been the rst to feel something happening) were stuck on Earth
wishing the other ten well on their fantastic voyage.
The experimenters collected detailed reports from all participants
before and after the study, as well as six months later. They found
that psilocybin had produced statistically signi cant e ects on nine
kinds of experiences: (1) unity, including loss of sense of self, and a
feeling of underlying oneness, (2) transcendence of time and space,

(3) deeply felt positive mood, (4) a sense of sacredness, (5) a sense
of gaining intuitive knowledge that felt deeply and authoritatively
true, (6) paradoxicality, (7) di culty describing what had
happened, (8) transiency, with all returning to normal within a few
hours, and (9) persisting positive changes in attitude and behavior.
Twenty- ve years later, Rick Doblin tracked down nineteen of the
twenty original subjects and interviewed them.24 He concluded that
“all psilocybin subjects participating in the long-term follow-up, but
none of the controls, still considered their original experience to
have had genuinely mystical elements and to have made a uniquely
valuable contribution to their spiritual lives.” One of the psilocybin
subjects recalled his experience like this:
All of a sudden I felt sort of drawn out into in nity, and
all of a sudden I had lost touch with my mind. I felt that
I was caught up in the vastness of Creation.… Sometimes
you would look up and see the light on the altar and it
would just be a blinding sort of light and radiations.…
We took such an in nitesimal amount of psilocybin, and
yet it connected me to in nity.
3. Raves
Rock music has always been associated with wild abandon and
sexuality. American parents in the 1950s often shared the horror of
those seventeenth-century Europeans faced with the ecstatic dancing
of the “savages.” But in the 1980s, British youth mixed together
new technologies to create a new kind of dancing that replaced the
individualism and sexuality of rock with more communal feelings.
Advances in electronics brought new and more hypnotic genres of
music, such as techno, trance, house, and drum and bass. Advances
in laser technology made it possible to bring spectacular visual
e ects into any party. And advances in pharmacology made a host
of new drugs available to the dancing class, particularly MDMA, a
variant of amphetamine that gives people long-lasting energy, along

with heightened feelings of love and openness. (Revealingly, the
colloquial name for MDMA is ecstasy.) When some or all of these
ingredients were combined, the result was so deeply appealing that
young people began converging by the thousands for all-night dance
parties, rst in the United Kingdom and then, in the 1990s,
throughout the developed world.
There’s a description of a rave experience in Tony Hsieh’s
autobiography Delivering Happiness. Hsieh (pronounced “Shay”) is
the CEO of the online retailer Zappos.com. He made a fortune at
the age of twenty-four when he sold his start-up tech company to
Microsoft. For the next few years Hsieh wondered what to do with
his life. He had a small group of friends who hung out together in
San Francisco. The rst time Hsieh and his “tribe” (as they called
themselves) attended a rave, it ipped his hive switch. Here is his
description:
What I experienced next changed my perspective
forever.… Yes, the decorations and lasers were pretty
cool, and yes, this was the largest single room full of
people dancing that I had ever seen. But neither of those
things explained the feeling of awe that I was
experiencing … As someone who is usually known as
being the most logical and rational person in a group, I
was surprised to
nd myself swept with an
overwhelming sense of spirituality—not in the religious
sense, but a sense of deep connection with everyone who
was there as well as the rest of the universe. There was a
feeling of no judgment.… Here there was no sense of selfconsciousness or feeling that anyone was dancing to be
seen dancing.… Everyone was facing the DJ, who was
elevated up on a stage.… The entire room felt like one
massive, united tribe of thousands of people, and the DJ
was the tribal leader of the group.… The steady
wordless electronic beats were the unifying heartbeats
that synchronized the crowd. It was as if the existence of

individual consciousness had disappeared and been replaced
by a single unifying group consciousness.25
Hsieh had stumbled into a modern version of the muscular
bonding that Ehrenreich and McNeill had described. The scene and
the experience awed him, shut down his “I,” and merged him into a
giant “we.” That night was a turning point in his life; it started him
on the path to creating a new kind of business embodying some of
the communalism and ego suppression he had felt at the rave.
There are many other ways to ip the hive switch. In the ten years
during which I’ve been discussing these ideas with my students at
UVA, I’ve heard reports of people getting “turned on” by singing in
choruses, performing in marching bands, listening to sermons,
attending political rallies, and meditating. Most of my students have
experienced the switch at least once, although only a few had a lifechanging experience. More commonly, the e ects fade away within
a few hours or days.
Now that I know what can happen when the hive switch gets
ipped in the right way at the right time, I look at my students
di erently. I still see them as individuals competing with each other
for grades, honors, and romantic partners. But I have a new
appreciation for the zeal with which they throw themselves into
extracurricular activities, most of which turn them into team
players. They put on plays, compete in sports, rally for political
causes, and volunteer for dozens of projects to help the poor and the
sick in Charlottesville and in faraway countries. I see them
searching for a calling, which they can only nd as part of a larger
group. I now see them striving and searching on two levels
simultaneously, for we are all Homo duplex.
THE BIOLOGY OF THE HIVE SWITCH
If the hive switch is real—if it’s a group-level adaptation designed
by group-level selection for group binding—then it must be made

out of neurons, neurotransmitters, and hormones. It’s not going to
be a spot in the brain—a clump of neurons that humans have and
chimpanzees lack. Rather, it will be a functional system cobbled
together from preexisting circuits and substances reused in slightly
novel ways to produce a radically novel ability. In the last ten years
there’s been an avalanche of research on the two26 most likely
building materials of this functional system.27
If evolution chanced upon a way to bind people together into
large groups, the most obvious glue is oxytocin, a hormone and
neurotransmitter produced by the hypothalamus. Oxytocin is widely
used among vertebrates to prepare females for motherhood. In
mammals it causes uterine contractions and milk letdown, as well as
a powerful motivation to touch and care for one’s children.
Evolution has often reused oxytocin to forge other kinds of bonds.
In species in which males stick by their mates or protect their own
o spring, it’s because male brains were slightly modi ed to be
more responsive to oxytocin.28
In people, oxytocin reaches far beyond family life. If you squirt
oxytocin spray into a person’s nose, he or she will be more trusting
in a game that involves transferring money temporarily to an
anonymous partner.29 Conversely, people who behave trustingly
cause oxytocin levels to increase in the partner they trusted.
Oxytocin levels also rise when people watch videos about other
people su ering—at least among those who report feelings of
empathy and a desire to help.30 Your brain secretes more oxytocin
when you have intimate contact with another person, even if that
contact is just a back rub from a stranger.31
What a lovely hormone! It’s no wonder the press has swooned in
recent years, dubbing it the “love drug” and the “cuddle hormone.”
If we could put oxytocin into the world’s drinking water, might
there be an end to war and cruelty?
Unfortunately, no. If the hive switch is a product of group
selection, then it should show the signature feature of group
selection: parochial altruism.32 Oxytocin should bond us to our
partners and our groups, so that we can more e ectively compete
with other groups. It should not bond us to humanity in general.

Several recent studies have validated this prediction. In one set of
studies, Dutch men played a variety of economic games while
sitting alone in cubicles, linked via computers into small teams.33
Half of the men had been given a nasal spray of oxytocin, and half
got a placebo spray. The men who received oxytocin made less
sel sh decisions—they cared more about helping their group, but
they showed no concern at all for improving the outcomes of men
in the other groups. In one of these studies, oxytocin made men
more willing to hurt other teams (in a prisoner’s dilemma game)
because doing so was the best way to protect their own group. In a
set of follow-up studies, the authors found that oxytocin caused
Dutch men to like Dutch names more and to value saving Dutch
lives more (in trolley-type dilemmas). Over and over again the
researchers looked for signs that this increased in-group love would
be paired with increased out-group hate (toward Muslims), but they
failed to nd it.34 Oxytocin simply makes people love their in-group
more. It makes them parochial altruists. The authors conclude that
their ndings “provide evidence for the idea that neurobiological
mechanisms in general, and oxytocinergic systems in particular,
evolved to sustain and facilitate within-group coordination and
cooperation.”
The second candidate for sustaining within-group coordination is
the mirror neuron system. Mirror neurons were discovered
accidentally in the 1980s when a team of Italian scientists began
inserting tiny electrodes into individual neurons in the brains of
Macaque monkeys. The researchers were trying to nd out what
some individual cells were doing in a region of the cerebral cortex
that they knew controls ne motor movements. They discovered
that there were some neurons that red rapidly only when the
monkey made a very speci c movement, such as grasping a nut
between thumb and fore nger (versus, say, grabbing the nut with
the entire hand). But once they had these electrodes implanted and
hooked up to a speaker (so that they could hear the rate of ring),
they began to hear ring noises at odd times, such as when a
monkey was perfectly still and it was the researcher who had just
picked up something with his thumb and fore nger. This made no

sense because perception and action were supposed to occur in
separate regions of the brain. Yet here were neurons that didn’t care
whether the monkey was doing something or watching someone
else do it. The monkey seemed to mirror the actions of others in the
same part of its brain that it would use to do those actions itself.35
Later work demonstrated that most mirror neurons re not when
they see a speci c physical movement but when they see an action
that indicates a more general goal or intention. For example,
watching a video of a hand picking up a cup from a clean table, as if
to bring it to the person’s mouth, triggers a mirror neuron for
eating. But the exact same hand movement and the exact same cup
picked up from a messy table (where a meal seems to be nished)
triggers a di erent mirror neuron for picking things up in general.
The monkeys have neural systems that infer the intentions of others
—which is clearly a prerequisite for Tomasello’s shared
intentionality36—but they aren’t yet ready to share. Mirror neurons
seem designed for the monkeys’ own private use, either to help them
learn from others or to help them predict what another monkey will
do next.
In humans the mirror neuron system is found in brain regions that
correspond directly to those studied in macaques. But in humans the
mirror neurons have a much stronger connection to emotion-related
areas of the brain— rst to the insular cortex, and from there to the
amygdala and other limbic areas.37 People feel each other’s pain
and joy to a much greater degree than do any other primates. Just
seeing someone else smile activates some of the same neurons as
when you smile. The other person is e ectively smiling in your
brain, which makes you happy and likely to smile, which in turn
passes the smile into someone else’s brain.
Mirror neurons are perfectly suited for Durkheim’s collective
sentiments, particularly the emotional “electricity” of collective
e ervescence. But their Durkheimian nature comes out even more
clearly in a study led by the neuroscientist Tania Singer.38 Subjects
rst played an economic game with two strangers, one of whom
played nicely while the other played sel shly. In the next part of
the study, subjects’ brains were scanned while mild electric shocks

were delivered randomly to the hand of the subject, the hand of the
nice player, or the hand of the sel sh player. (The other players’
hands were visible to the subject, near her own while she was in the
scanner.) Results showed that subjects’ brains responded in the same
way when the “nice” player received a shock as when they
themselves were shocked. The subjects used their mirror neurons,
empathized, and felt the other’s pain. But when the sel sh player
got a shock, people showed less empathy, and some even showed
neural evidence of pleasure.39 In other words, people don’t just
blindly empathize; they don’t sync up with everyone they see. We
are conditional hive creatures. We are more likely to mirror and
then empathize with others when they have conformed to our moral
matrix than when they have violated it.40
HIVES AT WORK
From cradle to grave we are surrounded by corporations and things
made by corporations. What exactly are corporations, and how did
they come to cover the Earth? The word itself comes from corpus,
Latin for “body.” A corporation is, quite literally, a superorganism.
Here is an early de nition, from Stewart Kyd’s 1794 Treatise on the
Law of Corporations:
[A corporation is] a collection of many individuals united
into one body, under a special denomination, having
perpetual succession under an arti cial form, and vested,
by policy of the law, with the capacity of acting, in
several respects, as an individual.41
This legal ction, recognizing “a collection of many individuals”
as a new kind of individual, turned out to be a winning formula. It
let people place themselves into a new kind of boat within which
they could divide labor, suppress free riding, and take on gigantic
tasks with the potential for gigantic rewards.

Corporations and corporate law helped England pull out ahead of
the rest of the world in the early days of the industrial revolution.
As with the transition to beehives and city-states, it took a while for
the new superorganisms to work out the kinks, perfect the form,
and develop e ective defenses against external attacks and internal
subversion. But once those problems were addressed, there was
explosive growth. During the twentieth century, small businesses
got pushed to the margins or to extinction as corporations
dominated the most lucrative markets. Corporations are now so
powerful that only national governments can restrain the largest of
them (and even then it’s only some governments, and some of the
time).
It is possible to build a corporation sta ed entirely by Homo
economicus. The gains from cooperation and division of labor are so
vast that large companies can pay more than small businesses and
then use a series of institutionalized carrots and sticks—including
expensive monitoring and enforcement mechanisms—to motivate
self-serving employees to act in ways the company desires. But this
approach (sometimes called transactional leadership)42 has its
limits. Self-interested employees are Glauconians, far more
interested in looking good and getting promoted than in helping the
company.43
In contrast, an organization that takes advantage of our hivish
nature can activate pride, loyalty, and enthusiasm among its
employees and then monitor them less closely. This approach to
leadership (sometimes called transformational leadership)44
generates more social capital—the bonds of trust that help
employees get more work done at a lower cost than employees at
other rms. Hivish employees work harder, have more fun, and are
less likely to quit or to sue the company. Unlike Homo economicus,
they are truly team players.
What can leaders do to create more hivish organizations? The
rst step is to stop thinking so much about leadership. One group of
scholars has used multilevel selection to think about what
leadership really is. Robert Hogan, Robert Kaiser, and Mark van
Vugt argue that leadership can only be understood as the

complement of followership.45 Focusing on leadership alone is like
trying to understand clapping by studying only the left hand. They
point out that leadership is not even the more interesting hand; it’s
no puzzle to understand why people want to lead. The real puzzle is
why people are willing to follow.
These scholars note that people evolved to live in groups of up to
150 that were relatively egalitarian and wary of alpha males (as
Chris Boehm said).46 But we also evolved the ability to rally around
leaders when our group is under threat or is competing with other
groups. Remember how the Rattlers and the Eagles instantly
became more tribal and hierarchical the instant they discovered the
presence of the other group?47 Research also shows that strangers
will spontaneously organize themselves into leaders and followers
when natural disasters strike.48 People are happy to follow when
they see that their group needs to get something done, and when
the person who emerges as the leader doesn’t activate their
hypersensitive oppression detectors. A leader must construct a
moral matrix based in some way on the Authority foundation (to
legitimize the authority of the leader), the Liberty foundation (to
make sure that subordinates don’t feel oppressed, and don’t want to
band together to oppose a bullying alpha male), and above all, the
Loyalty foundation (which I de ned in chapter 7 as a response to
the challenge of forming cohesive coalitions).
Using this evolutionary framework, we can draw some direct
lessons for anyone who wants to make a team, company, school, or
other organization more hivish, happy, and productive. You don’t
need to slip ecstasy into the watercooler and then throw a rave
party in the cafeteria. The hive switch may be more of a slider
switch than an on-o switch, and with a few institutional changes
you can create environments that will nudge everyone’s sliders a bit
closer to the hive position. For example:
• Increase similarity, not diversity. To make a human hive,
you want to make everyone feel like a family. So don’t
call attention to racial and ethnic di erences; make them
less relevant by ramping up similarity and celebrating

the group’s shared values and common identity.49 A
great deal of research in social psychology shows that
people are warmer and more trusting toward people
who look like them, dress like them, talk like them, or
even just share their rst name or birthday.50 There’s
nothing special about race. You can make people care
less about race by drowning race di erences in a sea of
similarities,
shared
goals,
and
mutual
51
interdependencies.

• Exploit synchrony. People who move together are saying,
“We are one, we are a team; just look how perfectly we
are able to do that Tomasello shared-intention thing.”
Japanese corporations such as Toyota begin their days
with synchronous companywide exercises. Groups
prepare for battle—in war and sports—with group
chants and ritualized movements. (If you want to see an
impressive one in rugby, Google “All Blacks Haka.”) If
you ask people to sing a song together, or to march in
step, or just to tap out some beats together on a table, it
makes them trust each other more and be more willing
to help each other out, in part because it makes people
feel more similar to each other.52 If it’s too creepy to ask
your employees or fellow group members to do
synchronized calisthenics, perhaps you can just try to
have more parties with dancing or karaoke. Synchrony
builds trust.
• Create healthy competition among teams, not individuals. As
McNeill said, soldiers don’t risk their lives for their
country or for the army; they do so for their buddies in
the same squad or platoon. Studies show that intergroup
competition increases love of the in-group far more than
it increases dislike of the out-group.53 Intergroup
competitions, such as friendly rivalries between
corporate divisions, or intramural sports competitions,
should have a net positive e ect on hivishness and social

capital. But pitting individuals against each other in a
competition for scarce resources (such as bonuses) will
destroy hivishness, trust, and morale.
Much more could be said about leading a hivish organization.54
Kaiser and Hogan o er this summary of the research literature:
Transactional leadership appeals to followers’ selfinterest, but transformational leadership changes the
way followers see themselves—from isolated individuals to
members of a larger group. Transformational leaders do
this by modeling collective commitment (e.g., through
self-sacri ce and the use of “we” rather than “I”),
emphasizing the similarity of group members, and
reinforcing collective goals, shared values, and common
interests.55
In other words, transformational leaders understand (at least
implicitly) that human beings have a dual nature. They set up
organizations that engage, to some degree, the higher level of that
nature. Good leaders create good followers, but followership in a
hivish organization is better described as membership.
POLITICAL HIVES
Great leaders understand Durkheim, even if they’ve never read his
work. For Americans born before 1950, you can activate their
Durkheimian higher nature by saying just two words: “Ask not.”
The full sentence they’ll hear in their minds comes from John F.
Kennedy’s 1961 inaugural address. After calling on all Americans to
“bear the burden of a long twilight struggle”—that is, to pay the
costs and take the risks of ghting the cold war against the Soviet
Union—Kennedy delivered one of the most famous lines in
American history: “And so, my fellow Americans, ask not what your
country can do for you; ask what you can do for your country.”

The yearning to serve something larger than the self has been the
basis of so many modern political movements. Here’s another
brilliantly Durkheimian appeal:
[Our movement rejects the view of man] as an
individual, standing by himself, self-centered, subject to
natural law, which instinctively urges him toward a life
of sel sh momentary pleasure; it sees not only the
individual but the nation and the country; individuals
and generations bound together by a moral law, with
common traditions and a mission which, suppressing the
instinct for life closed in a brief circle of pleasure, builds
up a higher life, founded on duty, a life free from the
limitations of time and space, in which the individual, by
self-sacri ce, the renunciation of self-interest … can
achieve that purely spiritual existence in which his value
as a man consists.
Inspiring stu , until you learn that it’s from The Doctrine of
Fascism, by Benito Mussolini.56 Fascism is hive psychology scaled up
to grotesque heights. It’s the doctrine of the nation as a
superorganism, within which the individual loses all importance. So
hive psychology is bad stu , right? Any leader who tries to get
people to forget themselves and merge into a team pursuing a
common goal is irting with fascism, no? Asking your employees to
exercise together—isn’t that the sort of thing Hitler did at his
Nuremberg rallies?
Ehrenreich devotes a chapter of Dancing in the Streets to refuting
this concern. She notes that ecstatic dancing is an evolved
biotechnology for dissolving hierarchy and bonding people to each
other as a community. Ecstatic dancing, festivals, and carnivals
invariably erase or invert the hierarchies of everyday life. Men
dress as women, peasants pretend to be nobles, and leaders can be
safely mocked. When it’s all over and people have returned to their
normal social stations, those stations are a bit less rigid, and the
connections among people in di erent stations are a bit warmer.57

Fascist rallies, Ehrenreich notes, were nothing like this. They
were spectacles, not festivals. They used awe to strengthen hierarchy
and to bond people to the godlike gure of the leader. People at
fascist rallies didn’t dance, and they surely didn’t mock their
leaders. They stood around passively for hours, applauding when
groups of soldiers marched by, or cheering wildly when the dear
leader arrived and spoke to them.58
Fascist dictators clearly exploited many aspects of humanity’s
groupish psychology, but is that a valid reason for us to shun or fear
the hive switch? Hiving comes naturally, easily, and joyfully to us.
Its normal function is to bond dozens or at most hundreds of people
together into communities of trust, cooperation, and even love.
Those bonded groups may care less about outsiders than they did
before their bonding—the nature of group selection is to suppress
sel shness within groups to make them more e ective at competing
with other groups. But is that really such a bad thing overall, given
how shallow our care for strangers is in the rst place? Might the
world be a better place if we could greatly increase the care people
get within their existing groups and nations while slightly
decreasing the care they get from strangers in other groups and
nations?
Let’s imagine two nations, one full of small-scale hives, one
devoid of them. In the hivish nation, let’s suppose that most people
participate in several cross-cutting hives—perhaps one at work, one
at church, and one in a weekend sports league. At universities, most
students join fraternities and sororities. In the workplace, most
leaders structure their organizations to take advantage of our
groupish overlay. Throughout their lives, citizens regularly enjoy
muscular bonding, team building, and moments of selftranscendence with groups of fellow citizens who may be di erent
from them racially, but with whom they feel deep similarity and
interdependence. This bonding is often accompanied by the
excitement of intergroup competition (as in sports and business),
but sometimes not (as in church).
In the second nation, there’s no hiving at all. Everyone cherishes
their autonomy and respects the autonomy of their fellow citizens.

Groups form only to the extent that they advance the interests of
their members. Businesses are led by transactional leaders who
align the material interests of employees as closely as possible with
the interests of the company, so that if everyone pursues their selfinterest, the business will thrive. In this non-hivish nation you’ll nd
families and plenty of friendships; you’ll nd altruism (both kin and
reciprocal). You’ll nd all the stu described by evolutionary
psychologists who doubt that group selection occurred, but you’ll
nd no evidence of group-related adaptations such as the hive
switch. You’ll nd no culturally approved or institutionalized ways
to lose yourself in a larger group.
Which nation do you think would score higher on measures of
social capital, mental health, and happiness? Which nation will
produce more successful businesses and a higher standard of living?
59

When a single hive is scaled up to the size of a nation and is led
by a dictator with an army at his disposal, the results are invariably
disastrous. But that is no argument for removing or suppressing
hives at lower levels. In fact, a nation that is full of hives is a nation
of happy and satis ed people. It’s not a very promising target for
takeover by a demagogue o ering people meaning in exchange for
their souls. Creating a nation of multiple competing groups and
parties was, in fact, seen by America’s founding fathers as a way of
preventing tyranny.60 More recently, research on social capital has
demonstrated that bowling leagues, churches, and other kinds of
groups, teams, and clubs are crucial for the health of individuals and
of a nation. As political scientist Robert Putnam put it, the social
capital that is generated by such local groups “makes us smarter,
healthier, safer, richer, and better able to govern a just and stable
democracy.”61
A nation of individuals, in contrast, in which citizens spend all
their time in Durkheim’s lower level, is likely to be hungry for
meaning. If people can’t satisfy their need for deep connection in
other ways, they’ll be more receptive to a smooth-talking leader
who urges them to renounce their lives of “sel sh momentary

pleasure” and follow him onward to “that purely spiritual existence”
in which their value as human beings consists.
IN SUM
When I began writing The Happiness Hypothesis, I believed that
happiness came from within, as Buddha and the Stoic philosophers
said thousands of years ago. You’ll never make the world conform
to your wishes, so focus on changing yourself and your desires. But
by the time I nished writing, I had changed my mind: Happiness
comes from between. It comes from getting the right relationships
between yourself and others, yourself and your work, and yourself
and something larger than yourself.
Once you understand our dual nature, including our groupish
overlay, you can see why happiness comes from between. We
evolved to live in groups. Our minds were designed not only to help
us win the competition within our groups, but also to help us unite
with those in our group to win competitions across groups.
In this chapter I presented the hive hypothesis, which states that
human beings are conditional hive creatures. We have the ability
(under special circumstances) to transcend self-interest and lose
ourselves (temporarily and ecstatically) in something larger than
ourselves. I called this ability the hive switch. The hive switch is
another way of stating Durkheim’s idea that we are Homo duplex;
we live most of our lives in the ordinary (profane) world, but we
achieve our greatest joys in those brief moments of transit to the
sacred world, in which we become “simply a part of a whole.”
I described three common ways in which people ip the hive
switch: awe in nature, Durkheimian drugs, and raves. I described
recent ndings about oxytocin and mirror neurons that suggest that
they are the stu of which the hive switch is made. Oxytocin bonds
people to their groups, not to all of humanity. Mirror neurons help
people empathize with others, but particularly those that share their
moral matrix.

It would be nice to believe that we humans were designed to love
everyone unconditionally. Nice, but rather unlikely from an
evolutionary perspective. Parochial love—love within groups—
ampli ed by similarity, a sense of shared fate, and the suppression
of free riders, may be the most we can accomplish.

