TWELVE

Can’t We All Disagree More Constructively?

“Politics ain’t beanbag,” said a Chicago humorist in 1895;1 it’s not a
game for children. Ever since then the saying has been used to
justify the rough-and-tumble nastiness of American politics.
Rationalists might dream of a utopian state where policy is made by
panels of unbiased experts, but in the real world there seems to be
no alternative to a political process in which parties compete to win
votes and money. That competition always involves trickery and
demagoguery, as politicians play fast and loose with the truth, using
their inner press secretaries to portray themselves in the best
possible light and their opponents as fools who would lead the
country to ruin.
And yet, does it have to be this nasty? A lot of Americans have
noticed things getting worse. The country now seems polarized and
embattled to the point of dysfunction. They are right. Up until a few
years ago, there were some political scientists who claimed that the
so-called culture war was limited to Washington, and that
Americans had not in fact become more polarized in their attitudes
toward most policy issues.2 But in the last twelve years Americans
have begun to move further apart. There’s been a decline in the
number of people calling themselves centrists or moderates (from
40 percent in 2000 down to 36 percent in 2011), a rise in the
number of conservatives (from 38 percent to 41 percent), and a rise
in the number of liberals (from 19 percent to 21 percent).3

. Civility now. These posters were created by Je Gates, a
graphic designer for the Chamomile Tea Party, drawing on
American posters from the World War II era. (See
www.chamomileteaparty.com. Used with permission.) (photo credit
12.1)
FIGURE 12.1

But this slight spreading out of the electorate is nothing compared
to what’s happened in Washington, the media, and the political class
more broadly. Things changed in the 1990s, beginning with new
rules and new behaviors in Congress.4 Friendships and social
contacts across party lines were discouraged. Once the human
connections were weakened, it became easier to treat members of
the other party as the permanent enemy rather than as fellow
members of an elite club. Candidates began to spend more time and
money on “oppo” (opposition research), in which sta members or
paid consultants dig up dirt on opponents (sometimes illegally) and
then shovel it to the media. As one elder congressman recently put
it, “This is not a collegial body any more. It is more like gang
behavior. Members walk into the chamber full of hatred.”5
This shift to a more righteous and tribal mentality was bad
enough in the 1990s, a time of peace, prosperity, and balanced

budgets. But nowadays, when the scal and political situations are
so much worse, many Americans feel that they’re on a ship that’s
sinking, and the crew is too busy ghting with each other to bother
plugging the leaks.
In the summer of 2011, the stakes were raised. The failure of the
two parties to agree on a routine bill to raise the debt ceiling, and
their failure to agree on a “grand bargain” to reduce the long-term
de cit, led a bond rating agency to downgrade America’s credit
rating. The downgrade sent stock markets plummeting around the
globe and increased the prospects for a “double dip” recession at
home—which would be a disaster for the many developing nations
that export to America. America’s hyperpartisanship is now a threat
to the world.
What’s going on here? In chapter 8, I portrayed the American
culture war as a battle between a three-foundation morality and a
six-foundation morality. But what leads people to adopt either of
these moralities in the rst place? Psychologists have discovered a
lot about the psychological origins of partisanship. Morality binds
and blinds, and to understand the mess we’re in, we’ve got to
understand why some people bind themselves to the liberal team,
some to the conservative team, some to other teams or to no team
at all.
A NOTE ABOUT POLITICAL DIVERSITY
I’m going to focus on what is known about the psychology of
liberals and conservatives—the two end points of a one-dimensional
scale. Many people resist and resent attempts to reduce ideology to
a single dimension. Indeed, one of the great strengths of Moral
Foundations Theory is that it gives you six dimensions, allowing for
millions of possible combinations of settings. People don’t come in
just two types. Unfortunately, most research on political psychology
has used the left-right dimension with American samples, so in
many cases that’s all we have to go on. But I should also note that
this one dimension is still quite useful. Most people in the United

States and in Europe can place themselves somewhere along it
(even if most people are somewhat near the middle).6 And it is the
principal axis of the American culture war and of congressional
voting,7 so even if relatively few people t perfectly into the
extreme types I’m going to describe, understanding the psychology
of liberalism and conservatism is vital for understanding a problem
that threatens the entire world.
FROM GENES TO MORAL MATRICES
Here’s a simple de nition of ideology: “A set of beliefs about the
proper order of society and how it can be achieved.”8 And here’s the
most basic of all ideological questions: Preserve the present order,
or change it? At the French Assembly of 1789, the delegates who
favored preservation sat on the right side of the chamber, while
those who favored change sat on the left. The terms right and left
have stood for conservatism and liberalism ever since.
Political theorists since Marx had long assumed that people chose
ideologies to further their self-interest. The rich and powerful want
to preserve and conserve; the peasants and workers want to change
things (or at least they would if their consciousness could be raised
and they could see their self-interest properly, said the Marxists).
But even though social class may once have been a good predictor
of ideology, that link has been largely broken in modern times,
when the rich go both ways (industrialists mostly right, tech
billionaires mostly left) and so do the poor (rural poor mostly right,
urban poor mostly left). And when political scientists looked into it,
they found that self-interest does a remarkably poor job of
predicting political attitudes.9
So for most of the late twentieth century, political scientists
embraced blank-slate theories in which people soaked up the
ideology of their parents or the TV programs they watched.10 Some
political scientists even said that most people were so confused
about political issues that they had no real ideology at all.11

But then came the studies of twins. In the 1980s, when scientists
began analyzing large databases that allowed them to compare
identical twins (who share all of their genes, plus, usually, their
prenatal and childhood environments) to same-sex fraternal twins
(who share half of their genes, plus their prenatal and childhood
environments), they found that the identical twins were more
similar on just about everything.12 And what’s more, identical twins
reared in separate households (because of adoption) usually turn out
to be very similar, whereas unrelated children reared together
(because of adoption) rarely turn out similar to each other, or to
their adoptive parents; they tend to be more similar to their genetic
parents. Genes contribute, somehow, to just about every aspect of
our personalities.13
We’re not just talking about IQ, mental illness, and basic
personality traits such as shyness. We’re talking about the degree to
which you like jazz, spicy foods, and abstract art; your likelihood of
getting a divorce or dying in a car crash; your degree of religiosity,
and your political orientation as an adult. Whether you end up on
the right or the left of the political spectrum turns out to be just as
heritable as most other traits: genetics explains between a third and
a half of the variability among people on their political attitudes.14
Being raised in a liberal or conservative household accounts for
much less.
How can that be? How can there be a genetic basis for attitudes
about nuclear power, progressive taxation, and foreign aid when
these issues only emerged in the last century or two? And how can
there be a genetic basis for ideology when people sometimes change
their political parties as adults?
To answer these questions it helps to return to the de nition of
innate that I gave in chapter 7. Innate does not mean unmalleable; it
means organized in advance of experience. The genes guide the
construction of the brain in the uterus, but that’s only the rst draft,
so to speak. The draft gets revised by childhood experiences. To
understand the origins of ideology you have to take a
developmental perspective, starting with the genes and ending with

an adult voting for a particular candidate or joining a political
protest. There are three major steps in the process.
Step 1: Genes Make Brains
After analyzing the DNA of 13,000 Australians, scientists recently
found several genes that di ered between liberals and
conservatives.15 Most of them related to neurotransmitter
functioning, particularly glutamate and serotonin, both of which are
involved in the brain’s response to threat and fear. This nding ts
well with many studies showing that conservatives react more
strongly than liberals to signs of danger, including the threat of
germs and contamination, and even low-level threats such as sudden
blasts of white noise.16 Other studies have implicated genes related
to receptors for the neurotransmitter dopamine, which has long
been tied to sensation-seeking and openness to experience, which
are among the best-established correlates of liberalism.17 As the
Renaissance writer Michel de Montaigne said: “The only things I
nd rewarding … are variety and the enjoyment of diversity.”18
Even though the e ects of any single gene are tiny, these ndings
are important because they illustrate one sort of pathway from
genes to politics: the genes (collectively) give some people brains
that are more (or less) reactive to threats, and that produce less (or
more) pleasure when exposed to novelty, change, and new
experiences.19 These are two of the main personality factors that
have consistently been found to distinguish liberals and
conservatives. A major review paper by political psychologist John
Jost found a few other traits, but nearly all of them are
conceptually related to threat sensitivity (e.g., conservatives react
more strongly to reminders of death) or openness to experience
(e.g., liberals have less need for order, structure, and closure).20
Step 2: Traits Guide Children Along Di erent Paths

Where do our personalities come from? To answer that question, we
need to distinguish among three di erent levels of personality,
according to a useful theory from psychologist Dan McAdams.21 The
lowest level of our personalities, which he calls “dispositional
traits,” are the sorts of broad dimensions of personality that show
themselves in many di erent situations and are fairly consistent
from childhood through old age. These are traits such as threat
sensitivity, novelty seeking, extraversion, and conscientiousness.
These traits are not mental modules that some people have and
others lack; they’re more like adjustments to dials on brain systems
that everyone has.
Let’s imagine a pair of fraternal twins, a brother and sister raised
together in the same home. During their nine months together in
their mother’s womb, the brother’s genes were busy constructing a
brain that was a bit higher than average in its sensitivity to threats,
a bit lower than average in its tendency to feel pleasure when
exposed to radically new experiences. The sister’s genes were busy
making a brain with the opposite settings.
The two siblings grow up in the same house and attend the same
schools, but they gradually create di erent worlds for themselves.
Even in nursery school, their behavior causes adults to treat them
di erently. One study found that women who called themselves
liberals as adults had been rated by their nursery school teachers as
having traits consistent with threat insensitivity and noveltyseeking.22 Future liberals were described as being more curious,
verbal, and self-reliant, but also more assertive and aggressive, less
obedient and neat. So if we could observe our fraternal twins in
their rst years of schooling, we’d nd teachers responding
di erently to them. Some teachers might be drawn to the creative
but rebellious little girl; others would crack down on her as an
unruly brat, while praising her brother as a model student.
But dispositional traits are just the lowest of the three levels,
according to McAdams. The second level is our “characteristic
adaptations.” These are traits that emerge as we grow. They are
called adaptations because people develop them in response to the
speci c environments and challenges that they happen to face. For

example, let’s follow our twins into adolescence, and let’s suppose
they attend a fairly strict and well-ordered school. The brother ts
in well, but the sister engages in constant battles with the teachers.
She becomes angry and socially disengaged. These are now parts of
her personality—her characteristic adaptations—but they would not
have developed had she gone to a more progressive and less
structured school.
By the time they reach high school and begin to take an interest
in politics, the two siblings have chosen di erent activities (the
sister joins the debate team in part for the opportunity to travel; the
brother gets more involved with his family’s church) and amassed
di erent friends (the sister joins the goths; the brother joins the
jocks). The sister chooses to go to college in New York City, where
she majors in Latin American studies and nds her calling as an
advocate for the children of illegal immigrants. Because her social
circle is entirely composed of liberals, she is enmeshed in a moral
matrix based primarily on the Care/harm foundation. In 2008, she
is electri ed by Barack Obama’s concern for the poor and his
promise of change.
The brother, in contrast, has no interest in moving far away to a
big, dirty, and threatening city. He chooses to stay close to family
and friends by attending the local branch of the state university. He
earns a degree in business and then works for a local bank,
gradually rising to a high position. He becomes a pillar of his church
and his community, the sort of person that Putnam and Campbell
praised for generating large amounts of social capital.23 The moral
matrices that surround him are based on all six foundations. There is
occasional talk in church sermons of helping victims of oppression,
but the most common moral themes in his life are personal
responsibility (based on the Fairness foundation—not being a free
rider or a burden on others) and loyalty to the many groups and
teams to which he belongs. He resonates to John McCain’s
campaign slogan, “Country First.”
Things didn’t have to work out this way. On the day they were
born, the sister was not predestined to vote for Obama; the brother
was not guaranteed to become a Republican. But their di erent sets

of genes gave them di erent rst drafts of their minds, which led
them down di erent paths, through di erent life experiences, and
into di erent moral subcultures. By the time they reach adulthood
they have become very di erent people whose one point of political
agreement is that they must not talk about politics when the sister
comes home for the holidays.
Step 3: People Construct Life Narratives
The human mind is a story processor, not a logic processor.
Everyone loves a good story; every culture bathes its children in
stories.
Among the most important stories we know are stories about
ourselves, and these “life narratives” are McAdams’s third level of
personality. McAdams’s greatest contribution to psychology has
been his insistence that psychologists connect their quantitative data
(about the two lower levels, which we assess with questionnaires
and reaction-time measures) to a more qualitative understanding of
the narratives people create to make sense of their lives. These
narratives are not necessarily true stories—they are simpli ed and
selective reconstructions of the past, often connected to an idealized
vision of the future. But even though life narratives are to some
degree post hoc fabrications, they still in uence people’s behavior,
relationships, and mental health.24
Life narratives are saturated with morality. In one study,
McAdams used Moral Foundations Theory to analyze narratives he
collected from liberal and conservative Christians. He found the
same patterns in these stories that my colleagues and I had found
using questionnaires at YourMorals.org:
When asked to account for the development of their own
religious faith and moral beliefs, conservatives underscored deep
feelings about respect for authority, allegiance to one’s group, and
purity of the self, whereas liberals emphasized their deep feelings
regarding human su ering and social fairness.25

Life narratives provide a bridge between a developing adolescent
self and an adult political identity. Here, for example, is how Keith
Richards describes a turning point in his life in his recent
autobiography. Richards, the famously sensation-seeking and
nonconforming lead guitarist of the Rolling Stones, was once a
marginally well-behaved member of his school choir. The choir won
competitions with other schools, so the choir master got Richards
and his friends excused from many classes so that they could travel
to ever larger choral events. But when the boys reached puberty
and their voices changed, the choir master dumped them. They
were then informed that they would have to repeat a full year in
school to make up for their missed classes, and the choir master
didn’t lift a nger to defend them.
It was a “kick in the guts,” Richards says. It transformed him in
ways with obvious political rami cations:
The moment that happened, Spike, Terry and I, we
became terrorists. I was so mad, I had a burning desire
for revenge. I had reason then to bring down this
country and everything it stood for. I spent the next
three years trying to fuck them up. If you want to breed
a rebel, that’s the way to do it.… It still hasn’t gone out,
the re. That’s when I started to look at the world in a
di erent way, not their way anymore. That’s when I
realized that there’s bigger bullies than just bullies.
There’s them, the authorities. And a slow-burning fuse
was lit.26
Richards may have been predisposed by his personality to become
a liberal, but his politics were not predestined. Had his teachers
treated him di erently—or had he simply interpreted events
di erently when creating early drafts of his narrative—he could
have ended up in a more conventional job surrounded by
conservative colleagues and sharing their moral matrix. But once
Richards came to understand himself as a crusader against abusive
authority, there was no way he was ever going to vote for the

British Conservative Party. His own life narrative just t too well
with the stories that all parties on the left tell in one form or
another.
THE GRAND NARRATIVES OF LIBERALISM AND
CONSERVATISM
In the book Moral, Believing Animals, the sociologist Christian Smith
writes about the moral matrices within which human life takes
place.27 He agrees with Durkheim that every social order has at its
core something sacred, and he shows how stories, particularly
“grand narratives,” identify and reinforce the sacred core of each
matrix. Smith is a master at extracting these grand narratives and
condensing them into single paragraphs. Each narrative, he says,
identi es a beginning (“once upon a time”), a middle (in which a
threat or challenge arises), and an end (in which a resolution is
achieved). Each narrative is designed to orient listeners morally—to
draw their attention to a set of virtues and vices, or good and evil
forces—and to impart lessons about what must be done now to
protect, recover, or attain the sacred core of the vision.
One such narrative, which Smith calls the “liberal progress
narrative,” organizes much of the moral matrix of the American
academic left. It goes like this:
Once upon a time, the vast majority of human persons
su ered in societies and social institutions that were
unjust, unhealthy, repressive, and oppressive. These
traditional societies were reprehensible because of their
deep-rooted inequality, exploitation, and irrational
traditionalism.… But the noble human aspiration for
autonomy, equality, and prosperity struggled mightily
against the forces of misery and oppression, and
eventually succeeded in establishing modern, liberal,
democratic, capitalist, welfare societies. While modern
social conditions hold the potential to maximize the

individual freedom and pleasure of all, there is much
work to be done to dismantle the powerful vestiges of
inequality, exploitation, and repression. This struggle for
the good society in which individuals are equal and free
to pursue their self-de ned happiness is the one mission
truly worth dedicating one’s life to achieving.28
This narrative may not mesh perfectly with the moral matrices of
the left in European countries (where, for example, there is more
distrust of capitalism). Nonetheless, its general plotline should be
recognizable to leftists everywhere. It’s a heroic liberation
narrative. Authority, hierarchy, power, and tradition are the chains
that must be broken to free the “noble aspirations” of the victims.
Smith wrote this narrative before Moral Foundations Theory
existed, but you can see that the narrative derives its moral force
primarily from the Care/harm foundation (concern for the su ering
of victims) and the Liberty/oppression foundation (a celebration of
liberty as freedom from oppression, as well as freedom to pursue
self-de ned happiness). In this narrative, Fairness is political
equality (which is part of opposing oppression); there are only
oblique hints of Fairness as proportionality.29 Authority is
mentioned only as an evil, and there is no mention of Loyalty or
Sanctity.
Contrast that narrative to one for modern conservatism. The
clinical psychologist Drew Westen is another master of narrative
analysis, and in his book The Political Brain he extracts the master
narrative that was implicit, and sometimes explicit, in the major
speeches of Ronald Reagan.
Reagan defeated Democrat Jimmy Carter in 1980, a time when
Americans were being held hostage in Iran, the in ation rate was
over 10 percent, and America’s cities, industries, and self-con dence
were declining. The Reagan narrative goes like this:
Once upon a time, America was a shining beacon. Then
liberals came along and erected an enormous federal
bureaucracy that handcu ed the invisible hand of the

free market. They subverted our traditional American
values and opposed God and faith at every step of the
way.… Instead of requiring that people work for a
living, they siphoned money from hardworking
Americans and gave it to Cadillac-driving drug addicts
and welfare queens. Instead of punishing criminals, they
tried to “understand” them. Instead of worrying about
the victims of crime, they worried about the rights of
criminals.… Instead of adhering to traditional American
values of family, delity, and personal responsibility,
they preached promiscuity, premarital sex, and the gay
lifestyle … and they encouraged a feminist agenda that
undermined traditional family roles.… Instead of
projecting strength to those who would do evil around
the world, they cut military budgets, disrespected our
soldiers in uniform, burned our
ag, and chose
negotiation and multilateralism.… Then Americans
decided to take their country back from those who
sought to undermine it.30
This narrative would have to be edited for use in other countries
and eras, where what is being “conserved” di ers from the
American case. Nonetheless, its general plotline and moral breadth
should be recognizable to conservatives everywhere. This too is a
heroic narrative, but it’s a heroism of defense. It’s less suited to
being turned into a major motion picture. Rather than the visually
striking image of crowds storming the Bastille and freeing the
prisoners, this narrative looks more like a family reclaiming its
home from termites and then repairing the joists.
The Reagan narrative is also visibly conservative in that it relies
for its moral force on at least ve of the six moral foundations.
There’s only a hint of Care (for the victims of crime), but there are
very clear references to Liberty (as freedom from government
constraint), Fairness (as proportionality: taking money from those
who work hard and giving it to welfare queens), Loyalty (soldiers

and the ag), Authority (subversion of the family and of traditions),
and Sanctity (replacing God with the celebration of promiscuity).
The two narratives are as opposed as could be. Can partisans even
understand the story told by the other side? The obstacles to
empathy are not symmetrical. If the left builds its moral matrices on
a smaller number of moral foundations, then there is no foundation
used by the left that is not also used by the right. Even though
conservatives score slightly lower on measures of empathy31 and
may therefore be less moved by a story about su ering and
oppression, they can still recognize that it is awful to be kept in
chains. And even though many conservatives opposed some of the
great liberations of the twentieth century—of women, sweatshop
workers, African Americans, and gay people—they have applauded
others, such as the liberation of Eastern Europe from communist
oppression.
But when liberals try to understand the Reagan narrative, they
have a harder time. When I speak to liberal audiences about the
three “binding” foundations—Loyalty, Authority, and Sanctity—I
nd that many in the audience don’t just fail to resonate; they
actively reject these concerns as immoral. Loyalty to a group
shrinks the moral circle; it is the basis of racism and exclusion, they
say. Authority is oppression. Sanctity is religious mumbo-jumbo
whose only function is to suppress female sexuality and justify
homophobia.
In a study I did with Jesse Graham and Brian Nosek, we tested
how well liberals and conservatives could understand each other.
We asked more than two thousand American visitors to ll out the
Moral Foundations Questionnaire. One-third of the time they were
asked to ll it out normally, answering as themselves. One-third of
the time they were asked to ll it out as they think a “typical
liberal” would respond. One-third of the time they were asked to ll
it out as a “typical conservative” would respond. This design
allowed us to examine the stereotypes that each side held about the
other. More important, it allowed us to assess how accurate they
were by comparing people’s expectations about “typical” partisans

to the actual responses from partisans on the left and the right.32
Who was best able to pretend to be the other?
The results were clear and consistent. Moderates and
conservatives were most accurate in their predictions, whether they
were pretending to be liberals or conservatives. Liberals were the
least accurate, especially those who described themselves as “very
liberal.” The biggest errors in the whole study came when liberals
answered the Care and Fairness questions while pretending to be
conservatives. When faced with questions such as “One of the worst
things a person could do is hurt a defenseless animal” or “Justice is
the most important requirement for a society,” liberals assumed that
conservatives would disagree. If you have a moral matrix built
primarily on intuitions about care and fairness (as equality), and
you listen to the Reagan narrative, what else could you think?
Reagan seems completely unconcerned about the welfare of drug
addicts, poor people, and gay people. He’s more interested in
ghting wars and telling people how to run their sex lives.
If you don’t see that Reagan is pursuing positive values of
Loyalty, Authority, and Sanctity, you almost have to conclude that
Republicans see no positive value in Care and Fairness. You might
even go as far as Michael Feingold, a theater critic for the liberal
newspaper the Village Voice, when he wrote:
Republicans don’t believe in the imagination, partly
because so few of them have one, but mostly because it
gets in the way of their chosen work, which is to destroy
the human race and the planet. Human beings, who have
imaginations, can see a recipe for disaster in the making;
Republicans, whose goal in life is to pro t from disaster
and who don’t give a hoot about human beings, either
can’t or won’t. Which is why I personally think they
should be exterminated before they cause any more
harm.33
One of the many ironies in this quotation is that it shows the
inability of a theater critic—who skillfully enters fantastical

imaginary worlds for a living—to imagine that Republicans act
within a moral matrix that di ers from his own. Morality binds and
blinds.
THE LEFT’S BLIND SPOT: MORAL CAPITAL
My own intellectual life narrative has had two turning points. In
chapter 5 I recounted the rst one, in India, in which my mind
opened to the existence of the broader moralities described by
Richard Shweder (i.e., the ethics of community and divinity). But
from that turning point in 1993 through the election of Barack
Obama in 2008, I was still a partisan liberal. I wanted my team (the
Democrats) to beat the other team (the Republicans). In fact, I rst
began to study politics precisely because I was so frustrated by John
Kerry’s ine ectual campaign for the presidency. I was convinced
that American liberals simply did not “get” the morals and motives
of their conservative countrymen, and I wanted to use my research
on moral psychology to help liberals win.
To learn about political psychology, I decided to teach a graduate
seminar on the topic in the spring of 2005. Knowing that I’d be
teaching this new class, I was on the lookout for good readings. So
when I was visiting friends in New York a month after the Kerry
defeat, I went to a used-book store to browse its political science
section. As I scanned the shelves, one book jumped out at me—a
thick brown book with one word on its spine: Conservatism. It was a
volume of readings edited by the historian Jerry Muller. I started
reading Muller’s introduction while standing in the aisle, but by the
third page I had to sit down on the oor. I didn’t realize it until
years later, but Muller’s essay was my second turning point.
Muller began by distinguishing conservatism from orthodoxy.
Orthodoxy is the view that there exists a “transcendent moral order,
to which we ought to try to conform the ways of society.”34
Christians who look to the Bible as a guide for legislation, like
Muslims who want to live under sharia, are examples of orthodoxy.
They want their society to match an externally ordained moral

order, so they advocate change, sometimes radical change. This can
put them at odds with true conservatives, who see radical change as
dangerous.
Muller next distinguished conservatism from the counterEnlightenment. It is true that most resistance to the Enlightenment
can be said to have been conservative, by de nition (i.e., clerics and
aristocrats were trying to conserve the old order). But modern
conservatism, Muller asserts, nds its origins within the main
currents of Enlightenment thinking, when men such as David Hume
and Edmund Burke tried to develop a reasoned, pragmatic, and
essentially utilitarian critique of the Enlightenment project. Here’s
the line that quite literally oored me:
What makes social and political arguments conservative
as opposed to orthodox is that the critique of liberal or
progressive arguments takes place on the enlightened
grounds of the search for human happiness based on the
use of reason.35
As a lifelong liberal, I had assumed that conservatism =
orthodoxy = religion = faith = rejection of science. It followed,
therefore, that as an atheist and a scientist, I was obligated to be a
liberal. But Muller asserted that modern conservatism is really
about creating the best possible society, the one that brings about
the greatest happiness given local circumstances. Could it be? Was
there a kind of conservatism that could compete against liberalism
in the court of social science? Might conservatives have a better
formula for how to create a healthy, happy society?
I kept reading. Muller went through a series of claims about
human nature and institutions, which he said are the core beliefs of
conservatism. Conservatives believe that people are inherently
imperfect and are prone to act badly when all constraints and
accountability are removed (yes, I thought; see Glaucon, Tetlock,
and Ariely in chapter 4). Our reasoning is awed and prone to
overcon dence, so it’s dangerous to construct theories based on
pure reason, unconstrained by intuition and historical experience

(yes; see Hume in chapter 2 and Baron-Cohen on systemizing in
chapter 6). Institutions emerge gradually as social facts, which we
then respect and even sacralize, but if we strip these institutions of
authority and treat them as arbitrary contrivances that exist only for
our bene t, we render them less e ective. We then expose
ourselves to increased anomie and social disorder (yes; see
Durkheim in chapters 8 and 11).
Based on my own research, I had no choice but to agree with
these conservative claims. As I continued to read the writings of
conservative intellectuals, from Edmund Burke in the eighteenth
century through Friedrich Hayek and Thomas Sowell in the
twentieth, I began to see that they had attained a crucial insight
into the sociology of morality that I had never encountered before.
They understood the importance of what I’ll call moral capital.
(Please note that I am praising conservative intellectuals, not the
Republican Party.)36
The term social capital swept through the social sciences in the
1990s, jumping into the broader public vocabulary after Robert
Putnam’s 2000 book Bowling Alone.37 Capital, in economics, refers
to the resources that allow a person or rm to produce goods or
services. There’s nancial capital (money in the bank), physical
capital (such as a wrench or a factory), and human capital (such as a
well-trained sales force). When everything else is equal, a rm with
more of any kind of capital will outcompete a rm with less.
Social capital refers to a kind of capital that economists had
largely overlooked: the social ties among individuals and the norms
of reciprocity and trustworthiness that arise from those ties.38 When
everything else is equal, a rm with more social capital will
outcompete its less cohesive and less internally trusting competitors
(which makes sense given that human beings were shaped by
multilevel selection to be contingent cooperators). In fact,
discussions of social capital sometimes use the example of ultraOrthodox Jewish diamond merchants, which I mentioned in the
previous chapter.39 This tightly knit ethnic group has been able to
create the most e cient market because their transaction and
monitoring costs are so low—there’s less overhead on every deal.

And their costs are so low because they trust each other. If a rival
market were to open up across town composed of ethnically and
religiously diverse merchants, they’d have to spend a lot more
money on lawyers and security guards, given how easy it is to
commit fraud or theft when sending diamonds out for inspection by
other merchants. Like the nonreligious communes studied by
Richard Sosis, they’d have a much harder time getting individuals to
follow the moral norms of the community.40
Everyone loves social capital. Whether you’re left, right, or
center, who could fail to see the value of being able to trust and
rely upon others? But now let’s broaden our focus beyond rms
trying to produce goods and let’s think about a school, a commune,
a corporation, or even a whole nation that wants to improve moral
behavior. Let’s set aside problems of moral diversity and just
specify the goal as increasing the “output” of prosocial behaviors
and decreasing the “output” of antisocial behaviors, however the
group de nes those terms. To achieve almost any moral vision,
you’d probably want high levels of social capital. (It’s hard to
imagine how anomie and distrust could be bene cial.) But will
linking people together into healthy, trusting relationships be
enough to improve the ethical pro le of the group?
If you believe that people are inherently good, and that they
ourish when constraints and divisions are removed, then yes, that
may be su cient. But conservatives generally take a very di erent
view of human nature. They believe that people need external
structures or constraints in order to behave well, cooperate, and
thrive. These external constraints include laws, institutions,
customs, traditions, nations, and religions. People who hold this
“constrained”41 view are therefore very concerned about the health
and integrity of these “outside-the-mind” coordination devices.
Without them, they believe, people will begin to cheat and behave
sel shly. Without them, social capital will rapidly decay.
If you are a member of a WEIRD society, your eyes tend to fall
on individual objects such as people, and you don’t automatically
see the relationships among them. Having a concept such as social
capital is helpful because it forces you to see the relationships

within which those people are embedded, and which make those
people more productive. I propose that we take this approach one
step further. To understand the miracle of moral communities that
grow beyond the bounds of kinship we must look not just at people,
and not just at the relationships among people, but at the complete
environment within which those relationships are embedded, and
which makes those people more virtuous (however they themselves
de ne that term). It takes a great deal of outside-the-mind stu to
support a moral community.
For example, on a small island or in a small town, you typically
don’t need to lock your bicycle, but in a big city in the same
country, if you only lock the bike frame, your wheels may get
stolen. Being small, isolated, or morally homogeneous are examples
of environmental conditions that increase the moral capital of a
community. That doesn’t mean that small islands and small towns
are better places to live overall—the diversity and crowding of big
cities makes them more creative and interesting places for many
people—but that’s the trade-o . (Whether you’d trade away some
moral capital to gain some diversity and creativity will depend in
part on your brain’s settings on traits such as openness to experience
and threat sensitivity, and this is part of the reason why cities are
usually so much more liberal than the countryside.)
Looking at a bunch of outside-the-mind factors and at how well
they mesh with inside-the-mind moral psychology brings us right
back to the de nition of moral systems that I gave in the last
chapter. In fact, we can de ne moral capital as the resources that
sustain a moral community.42 More speci cally, moral capital refers
to
the degree to which a community possesses interlocking
sets of values, virtues, norms, practices, identities,
institutions, and technologies that mesh well with
evolved psychological mechanisms and thereby enable
the community to suppress or regulate sel shness and
make cooperation possible.

To see moral capital in action, let’s do a thought experiment using
the nineteenth-century communes studied by Richard Sosis. Let’s
assume that every commune was started by a group of twenty- ve
adults who knew, liked, and trusted one another. In other words,
let’s assume that every commune started with a high and equal
quantity of social capital on day one. What factors enabled some
communes to maintain their social capital and generate high levels
of prosocial behavior for decades while others degenerated into
discord and distrust within the rst year?
In the last chapter, I said that belief in gods and costly religious
rituals turned out to be crucial ingredients of success. But let’s put
religion aside and look at other kinds of outside-the-mind stu . Let’s
assume that each commune started o with a clear list of values and
virtues that it printed on posters and displayed throughout the
commune. A commune that valued self-expression over conformity
and that prized the virtue of tolerance over the virtue of loyalty
might be more attractive to outsiders, and this could indeed be an
advantage in recruiting new members, but it would have lower
moral capital than a commune that valued conformity and loyalty.
The stricter commune would be better able to suppress or regulate
sel shness, and would therefore be more likely to endure.
Moral communities are fragile things, hard to build and easy to
destroy. When we think about very large communities such as
nations, the challenge is extraordinary and the threat of moral
entropy is intense. There is not a big margin for error; many nations
are failures as moral communities, particularly corrupt nations
where dictators and elites run the country for their own bene t. If
you don’t value moral capital, then you won’t foster values, virtues,
norms, practices, identities, institutions, and technologies that
increase it.
Let me state clearly that moral capital is not always an unalloyed
good. Moral capital leads automatically to the suppression of free
riders, but it does not lead automatically to other forms of fairness
such as equality of opportunity. And while high moral capital helps
a community to function e ciently, the community can use that
e ciency to in ict harm on other communities. High moral capital

can be obtained within a cult or a fascist nation, as long as most
people truly accept the prevailing moral matrix.
Nonetheless, if you are trying to change an organization or a
society and you do not consider the e ects of your changes on
moral capital, you’re asking for trouble. This, I believe, is the
fundamental blind spot of the left. It explains why liberal reforms so
often back re,43 and why communist revolutions usually end up in
despotism. It is the reason I believe that liberalism—which has done
so much to bring about freedom and equal opportunity—is not
su cient as a governing philosophy. It tends to overreach, change
too many things too quickly, and reduce the stock of moral capital
inadvertently. Conversely, while conservatives do a better job of
preserving moral capital, they often fail to notice certain classes of
victims, fail to limit the predations of certain powerful interests,
and fail to see the need to change or update institutions as times
change.
A YIN AND TWO YANGS
In Chinese philosophy, yin and yang refer to any pair of contrasting
or seemingly opposed forces that are in fact complementary and
interdependent. Night and day are not enemies, nor are hot and
cold, summer and winter, male and female. We need both, often in
a shifting or alternating balance. John Stuart Mill said that liberals
and conservatives are like this: “A party of order or stability, and a
party of progress or reform, are both necessary elements of a
healthy state of political life.”44
The philosopher Bertrand Russell saw this same dynamic at work
throughout Western intellectual history: “From 600 BC to the
present day, philosophers have been divided into those who wished
to tighten social bonds and those who wished to relax them.”45
Russell then explained why both sides are partially right, using
terms that are about as close a match to moral capital as I could ever
hope to nd:

It is clear that each party to this dispute—as to all that
persist through long periods of time—is partly right and
partly wrong. Social cohesion is a necessity, and
mankind has never yet succeeded in enforcing cohesion
by merely rational arguments. Every community is
exposed to two opposite dangers: ossi cation through
too much discipline and reverence for tradition, on the
one hand; on the other hand, dissolution, or subjection to
foreign conquest, through the growth of an
individualism and personal independence that makes
cooperation impossible.46
I’m going to take a risk and apply Mill’s and Russell’s insights to
some current debates in American society. It’s a risk because
partisan readers may be able to accept my claims about yin and
yang in the abstract, but not when I start saying that the “other
side” has something useful to say about speci c controversial issues.
I’m willing to run this risk, however, because I want to show that
public policy might really be improved by drawing on insights from
all sides. I’ll use the framework of Durkheimian utilitarianism that I
developed at the end of chapter 11. That is, I’m going to evaluate
each issue based on how well the ideology in question can advance
the overall good of a society (that’s the utilitarian part), but I’m
going to adopt a view of humankind as being Homo duplex (or 90
percent chimp, 10 percent bee), which means that we humans need
access to healthy hives in order to ourish (that’s the Durkheimian
part).
Rather than just contrasting the left and the right, I’m going to
divide the opponents of the left into two groups—the social
conservatives (such as the religious right) and the libertarians
(sometimes called “classical liberals” because of their love of free
markets). These are two groups we’ve studied a lot at
YourMorals.org, and we
nd that they have very di erent
personalities and moralities. In what follows I’ll say brie y why I
think that liberals are justi ed on two major points. I’ll then say

where I think libertarians and social conservatives are justi ed, on
two counterpoints.
YIN: LIBERAL WISDOM
The left builds its moral matrix on three of the six foundations, but
it rests most rmly and consistently on the Care foundation.47 We
might illustrate it as in gure 12.2, where the thickness of each line
corresponds to the importance of each foundation.
Liberals are often suspicious of appeals to loyalty, authority, and
sanctity, although they don’t reject these intuitions in all cases
(think of the sancti cation of nature), so I drew those lines as thin,
but still existing. Liberals have many speci c values, but I think it’s
helpful, for each group, to identify its most sacred value—the “third
rail” that will get you electrocuted if you touch it. For American
liberals since the 1960s, I believe that the most sacred value is
caring for victims of oppression. Anyone who blames such victims
for their own problems or who displays or merely excuses prejudice
against sacralized victim groups can expect a vehement tribal
response.48
Our ndings at YourMorals.org match up with philosophical and
popular de nitions of liberalism that emphasize care for the
vulnerable, opposition to hierarchy and oppression, and an interest
in changing laws, traditions, and institutions to solve social
problems.49 The liberal radio host Garrison Keillor captured the
spirit and self-image of the modern American left when he wrote:
I am a liberal, and liberalism is the politics of kindness.
Liberals stand for tolerance, magnanimity, community
spirit, the defense of the weak against the powerful, love
of learning, freedom of belief, art and poetry, city life,
the very things that make America worth dying for.50
I’m not sure how many Americans have sacri ced their lives for
kindness and poetry, but I believe this moral matrix leads liberals to

make two points consistently, points that I believe are essential for
the health of a society.
Point #1: Governments Can and Should Restrain Corporate
Superorganisms
I loved the movie Avatar, but it contained the most foolish
evolutionary thinking I’ve ever seen. I found it easier to believe that
islands could oat in the sky than to believe that all creatures could
live in harmony, willingly lying down to let others eat them. There
was one futuristic element that I found quite believable, however.
The movie depicts Earth a few centuries from now as a planet run
by corporations that have turned national governments into their
lackeys.

FIGURE

12.2. The moral matrix of American liberals.

In chapter 9 I talked about major transitions in the evolution of
life. I described the process by which superorganisms emerge,
dominate their preferred niches, change their ecosystems, and push
their competitors to the margins or to extinction. In chapter 10 I
showed that corporations are superorganisms. They’re not like
superorganisms; they are actual superorganisms. So, if the past is

any guide, corporations will grow ever more powerful as they
evolve, and as they change the legal and political systems of their
host countries to become ever more hospitable. The only force left
on Earth that can stand up to the largest corporations are national
governments, some of which still maintain the power to tax,
regulate, and divide corporations into smaller pieces when they get
too powerful.
Economists speak of “externalities”—the costs (or bene ts)
incurred by third parties who did not agree to the transaction
causing the cost (or bene t). For example, if a farmer begins using
a new kind of fertilizer that increases his yield but causes more
damaging runo into nearby rivers, he keeps the pro t but the costs
of his decision are borne by others. If a factory farm nds a faster
way to fatten up cattle but thereby causes the animals to su er
more digestive problems and broken bones, it keeps the pro t and
the animals pay the cost. Corporations are obligated to maximize
pro t for shareholders, and that means looking for any and all
opportunities to lower costs, including passing on costs on to others
(when legal) in the form of externalities.
I am not anticorporate, I am simply a Glauconian. When
corporations operate in full view of the public, with a free press
that is willing and able to report on the externalities being foisted
on the public, they are likely to behave well, as most corporations
do. But many corporations operate with a high degree of secrecy
and public invisibility (for example, America’s giant food processors
and factory farms).51 And many corporations have the ability to
“capture” or otherwise in uence the politicians and federal agencies
whose job it is to regulate them (especially now that the U.S.
Supreme Court has given corporations and unions the “right” to
make unlimited donations to political causes).52 When corporations
are given the ring of Gyges, we can expect catastrophic results (for
the ecosystem, the banking system, public health, etc.).
I think liberals are right that a major function of government is to
stand up for the public interest against corporations and their
tendency to distort markets and impose externalities on others,
particularly on those least able to stand up for themselves in court

(such as the poor, or immigrants, or farm animals). E cient
markets require government regulation. Liberals go too far
sometimes—indeed, they are often re exively antibusiness,53 which
is a huge mistake from a utilitarian point of view. But it is healthy
for a nation to have a constant tug-of-war, a constant debate
between yin and yang over how and when to limit and regulate
corporate behavior.
Point #2: Some Problems Really Can Be Solved by Regulation
As automobile ownership skyrocketed in the 1950s and 1960s, so
did the tonnage of lead being blown out of American tailpipes and
into the atmosphere—200,000 tons of lead a year by 1973.54
(Gasoline re ners had been adding lead since the 1930s to increase
the e ciency of the re ning process.) Despite evidence that the
rising tonnage of lead was making its way into the lungs,
bloodstreams, and brains of Americans and was retarding the neural
development of millions of children, the chemical industry had been
able to block all e orts to ban lead additives from gasoline for
decades. It was a classic case of corporate superorganisms using all
methods of leverage to preserve their ability to pass a deadly
externality on to the public.
The Carter administration began a partial phaseout of leaded
gasoline, but it was nearly reversed when Ronald Reagan crippled
the Environmental Protection Agency’s ability to draft new
regulations or enforce old ones. A bipartisan group of congressmen
stood up for children and against the chemical industry, and by the
1990s lead had been completely removed from gasoline.55 This
simple public health intervention worked miracles: lead levels in
children’s blood dropped in lockstep with declining levels of lead in
gasoline, and the decline has been credited with some of the rise in
IQ that has been measured in recent decades.56
Even more amazingly, several studies have demonstrated that the
phaseout, which began in the late 1970s, may have been responsible
for up to half of the extraordinary and otherwise unexplained drop

in crime that occurred in the 1990s.57 Tens of millions of children,
particularly poor children in big cities, had grown up with high
levels of lead, which interfered with their neural development from
the 1950s until the late 1970s. The boys in this group went on to
cause the giant surge of criminality that terri ed America—and
drove it to the right—from the 1960s until the early 1990s. These
young men were eventually replaced by a new generation of young
men with unleaded brains (and therefore better impulse control),
which seems to be part of the reason the crime rate plummeted.
From a Durkheimian utilitarian perspective, it is hard to imagine
a better case for government intervention to solve a national health
problem. This one regulation saved vast quantities of lives, IQ
points, money, and moral capital all at the same time.58 And lead is
far from the only environmental hazard that disrupts neural
development. When young children are exposed to PCBs
(polychlorinated biphenyls), organophosphates (used in some
pesticides), and methyl mercury (a by-product of burning coal), it
lowers their IQ and raises their risk of ADHD (attention de cit
hyperactivity disorder).59 Given these brain disruptions, future
studies are likely to nd a link to violence and crime as well. Rather
than building more prisons, the cheapest (and most humane) way to
ght crime may be to give more money and authority to the
Environmental Protection Agency.
When conservatives object that liberal e orts to intervene in
markets or engage in “social engineering” always have unintended
consequences, they should note that sometimes those consequences
are positive. When conservatives say that markets o er better
solutions than do regulations, let them step forward and explain
their plan to eliminate the dangerous and unfair externalities
generated by many markets.60
YANG #1: LIBERTARIAN WISDOM
Libertarians are sometimes said to be socially liberal (favoring
individual freedom in private matters such as sex and drug use) and

economically conservative (favoring free markets), but those labels
reveal how confused these terms have become in the United States.
Libertarians are the direct descendants of the eighteenth- and
nineteenth-century Enlightenment reformers who fought to free
people and markets from the control of kings and clergy.
Libertarians love liberty; that is their sacred value. Many
libertarians wish they could simply be known as liberals,61 but they
lost that term in the United States (though not in Europe) when
liberalism split into two camps in the late nineteenth century. Some
liberals began to see powerful corporations and wealthy
industrialists as the chief threats to liberty. These “new liberals”
(also known as “left liberals” or “progressives”) looked to
government as the only force capable of protecting the public and
rescuing the many victims of the brutal practices of early industrial
capitalism. Liberals who continued to fear government as the chief
threat to liberty became known as “classical liberals,” “right
liberals” (in some countries), or libertarians (in the United States).
Those who took the progressive path began to use government
not just to safeguard liberty but to advance the general welfare of
the people, particularly those who could not fend for themselves.
Progressive Republicans (such as Theodore Roosevelt) and
Democrats (such as Woodrow Wilson) took steps to limit the
growing power of corporations, such as breaking up monopolies and
creating new government agencies to regulate labor practices and to
ensure the quality of foods and medicines. Some progressive
reforms intruded far more deeply into private life and personal
liberty, such as forcing parents to send their children to school and
banning the sale of alcohol.
You can see this fork in the road by looking at the liberal moral
matrix ( gure 12.2). It rests on two foundations primarily: Care and
Liberty (plus some Fairness, because everybody values
proportionality to some extent). Liberals in 1900 who relied most
heavily on the Care foundation—those who felt the pain of others
most keenly—were predisposed to take the left-hand (progressive)
fork. But liberals in 1900 who relied more heavily on the Liberty
foundation—those who felt the bite of restrictions on their liberty

most keenly—refused to follow (see gure 12.3). In fact, the
libertarian writer Will Wilkinson has recently suggested that
libertarians are basically liberals who love markets and lack
bleeding hearts.62
At YourMorals.org, we’ve found that Wilkinson is correct. In a
project led by Ravi Iyer and Sena Koleva, we analyzed dozens of
surveys completed by 12,000 libertarians and we compared their
responses to those of tens of thousands of liberals and
conservatives. We found that libertarians look more like liberals
than like conservatives on most measures of personality (for
example, both groups score higher than conservatives on openness
to experience, and lower than conservatives on disgust sensitivity
and conscientiousness). On the Moral Foundations Questionnaire,
libertarians join liberals in scoring very low on the Loyalty,
Authority, and Sanctity foundations. Where they diverge from
liberals most sharply is on two measures: the Care foundation,
where they score very low (even lower than conservatives), and on
some new questions we added about economic liberty, where they
score extremely high (a little higher than conservatives, a lot higher
than liberals).
For example, do you agree that “the government should do more
to advance the common good, even if that means limiting the
freedom and choices of individuals”? If so, then you are probably a
liberal. If not, then you could be either a libertarian or a
conservative. The split between liberals (progressives) and
libertarians (classical liberals) occurred over exactly this question
more than a hundred years ago, and it shows up clearly in our data
today. People with libertarian ideals have generally supported the
Republican Party since the 1930s because libertarians and
Republicans have a common enemy: the liberal welfare society that
they believe is destroying America’s liberty (for libertarians) and
moral ber (for social conservatives).

FIGURE

12.3. The moral matrix of American libertarians.

I believe that libertarians are right on many points,63 but I’ll focus
on just one counterpoint to liberalism here.
Counterpoint #1: Markets Are Miraculous
In 2007, David Goldhill’s father was killed by an infection he caught
while in the hospital. In trying to make sense of this unnecessary
death, Goldhill began to read about the American health care
system, which kills about 100,000 people annually by such
accidental infections. He learned that the death rate can be cut by
two-thirds when hospitals follow a simple checklist of sanitary
procedures, but most hospitals don’t adopt the checklist.
Goldhill, a businessman (and Democrat), wondered how it was
possible for any organization to pass up a simple measure that
yielded such massive payo s. In the business world, such
ine ciency would soon lead to bankruptcy. As he learned more and
more about the health care system, he discovered just how bad
things get when goods and services are provided without a properly
functioning market.

In 2009, Goldhill published a provocative essay in The Atlantic
titled “How American Health Care Killed My Father”:64 One of his
main points was the absurdity of using insurance to pay for routine
purchases. Normally we buy insurance to cover the risk of a
catastrophic loss. We enter an insurance pool with other people to
spread the risk around, and we hope never to collect a penny. We
handle routine expenses ourselves, seeking out the highest quality
for the lowest price. We would never le a claim on our car
insurance to pay for an oil change.
The next time you go to the supermarket, look closely at a can of
peas. Think about all the work that went into it—the farmers,
truckers, and supermarket employees, the miners and metalworkers
who made the can—and think how miraculous it is that you can buy
this can for under a dollar. At every step of the way, competition
among suppliers rewarded those whose innovations shaved a penny
o the cost of getting that can to you. If God is commonly thought
to have created the world and then arranged it for our bene t, then
the free market (and its invisible hand) is a pretty good candidate
for being a god. You can begin to understand why libertarians
sometimes have a quasi-religious faith in free markets.
Now let’s do the devil’s work and spread chaos throughout the
marketplace. Suppose that one day all prices are removed from all
products in the supermarket. All labels too, beyond a simple
description of the contents, so you can’t compare products from
di erent companies. You just take whatever you want, as much as
you want, and you bring it up to the register. The checkout clerk
scans in your food insurance card and helps you ll out your
itemized claim. You pay a at fee of $10 and go home with your
groceries. A month later you get a bill informing you that your food
insurance company will pay the supermarket for most of the
remaining cost, but you’ll have to send in a check for an additional
$15. It might sound like a bargain to get a cartload of food for $25,
but you’re really paying your grocery bill every month when you
fork over $2,000 for your food insurance premium.
Under such a system, there is little incentive for anyone to nd
innovative ways to reduce the cost of food or increase its quality.

The supermarkets get paid by the insurers, and the insurers get their
premiums from you. The cost of food insurance begins to rise as
supermarkets stock only the foods that net them the highest
insurance payments, not the foods that deliver value to you.
As the cost of food insurance rises, many people can no longer
a ord it. Liberals (motivated by Care) push for a new government
program to buy food insurance for the poor and the elderly. But
once the government becomes the major purchaser of food, then
success in the supermarket and food insurance industries depends
primarily on maximizing yield from government payouts. Before
you know it, that can of peas costs the government $30, and all of
us are paying 25 percent of our paychecks in taxes just to cover the
cost of buying groceries for each other at hugely in ated costs.
That, says Goldhill, is what we’ve done to ourselves. As long as
consumers are spared from taking price into account—that is, as
long as someone else is always paying for your choices—things will
get worse. We can’t x the problem by convening panels of experts
to set the maximum allowable price for a can of peas. Only a
working market65 can bring supply, demand, and ingenuity together
to provide health care at the lowest possible price. For example,
there is an open market for LASIK surgery (a kind of laser eye
surgery that removes the need to wear contact lenses). Doctors
compete with one another to attract customers, and because the
procedure is rarely covered by insurance, patients take price into
account. Competition and innovation have driven down the price of
the surgery by nearly 80 percent since it was rst introduced.
(Other developed nations have had more success controlling costs,
but they too face rapidly rising costs that may become scally
ruinous.66 Like America, they often lack the political will to raise
taxes or cut services.)
When libertarians talk about the miracle of “spontaneous order”
that emerges when people are allowed to make their own choices
(and take on the costs and bene ts of those choices), the rest of us
should listen.67 Care and compassion sometimes motivate liberals to
interfere in the workings of markets, but the result can be
extraordinary harm on a vast scale. (Of course, as I said above,

governments often need to intervene to correct market distortions,
thereby making markets work properly.) Liberals want to use
government for so many purposes, but health care expenses are
crowding out all other possibilities. If you think your local, state,
and federal governments are broke now, just wait until the baby
boom generation is fully retired.
I nd it ironic that liberals generally embrace Darwin and reject
“intelligent design” as the explanation for design and adaptation in
the natural world, but they don’t embrace Adam Smith as the
explanation for design and adaptation in the economic world. They
sometimes prefer the “intelligent design” of socialist economies,
which often ends in disaster from a utilitarian point of view.68
YANG #2: SOCIAL CONSERVATIVE WISDOM
Conservatives are the “party of order and stability,” in Mill’s
formulation. They generally resist the changes implemented by the
“party of progress or reform.” But to put things in those terms
makes conservatives sound like fearful obstructionists, trying to
hold back the hands of time and the “noble human aspirations” of
the liberal progress narrative.
A more positive way to describe conservatives is to say that their
broader moral matrix allows them to detect threats to moral capital
that liberals cannot perceive. They do not oppose change of all
kinds (such as the Internet), but they ght back ferociously when
they believe that change will damage the institutions and traditions
that provide our moral exoskeletons (such as the family).
Preserving those institutions and traditions is their most sacred
value.
For example, the historian Samuel Huntington noted that
conservatism can’t be de ned by the particular institutions it
sacralizes (which could be monarchy in eighteenth-century France,
or the Constitution in twenty- rst-century America). Rather, he
said, “when the foundations of society are threatened, the

conservative ideology reminds men of the necessity of some
institutions and the desirability of the existing ones.”69

FIGURE

12.4. The moral matrix of American social conservatives.

At YourMorals.org, we have found that social conservatives have
the broadest set of moral concerns, valuing all six foundations
relatively equally ( gure 12.4). This breadth—and particularly their
relatively high settings on the Loyalty, Authority, and Sanctity
foundations—give them insights that I think are valuable, from a
Durkheimian utilitarian perspective.
Counterpoint #2: You Can’t Help the Bees by Destroying the Hive
Liberals hate the idea of exclusion. At a talk I attended a few years
ago, a philosophy professor bashed the legitimacy of nation-states.
“They’re just arbitrary lines on the map,” he said. “Some people
draw a line and say, ‘Everything on this side is ours. The rest of you
keep out.’ ” Others in the room laughed along with him. At a talk
that I gave recently, I found the same dislike of exclusion applied to
religions. A graduate student was surprised by my claim that
religions are often good for the rest of society, and she said, “But
religions are all exclusive!” I asked her what she meant, and she

replied: “Well, the Catholic Church won’t accept anyone who
doesn’t believe its teachings.” I couldn’t believe she was serious. I
pointed out that our graduate program at UVA was more exclusive
than the church—we rejected almost all applicants. In the course of
our discussion it became clear that her overriding concern was for
victims of discrimination, particularly gay people who are told that
they don’t belong in many religious communities.
Comments such as these convince me that John Lennon captured
a common liberal dream in his haunting song “Imagine.” Imagine if
there were no countries, and no religion too. If we could just erase
the borders and boundaries that divide us, then the world would “be
as one.” It’s a vision of heaven for liberals, but conservatives
believe it would quickly descend into hell. I think conservatives are
on to something.
Throughout this book I’ve argued that large-scale human societies
are nearly miraculous achievements. I’ve tried to show how our
complicated moral psychology coevolved with our religions and our
other cultural inventions (such as tribes and agriculture) to get us
where we are today. I have argued that we are products of
multilevel selection, including group selection, and that our
“parochial altruism” is part of what makes us such great team
players. We need groups, we love groups, and we develop our
virtues in groups, even though those groups necessarily exclude
nonmembers. If you destroy all groups and dissolve all internal
structure, you destroy your moral capital.
Conservatives understand this point. Edmund Burke said it in
1790:
To be attached to the subdivision, to love the little
platoon we belong to in society, is the rst principle (the
germ as it were) of public a ections. It is the rst link in
the series by which we proceed towards a love to our
country, and to mankind.70
Adam Smith argued similarly that patriotism and parochialism are
good things because they lead people to exert themselves to

improve the things they can improve:
That wisdom which contrived the system of human
a ections … seems to have judged that the interest of
the great society of mankind would be best promoted by
directing the principal attention of each individual to
that particular portion of it, which was most within the
sphere both of his abilities and of his understanding.71
Now that’s Durkheimian utilitarianism. It’s utilitarianism done by
somebody who understands human groupishness.
Robert Putnam has provided a wealth of evidence that Burke and
Smith were right. In the previous chapter I told you about his
nding that religions make Americans into “better neighbors and
better citizens.” I told you his conclusion that the active ingredient
that made people more virtuous was enmeshing them into
relationships with their co-religionists. Anything that binds people
together into dense networks of trust makes people less sel sh.
In an earlier study, Putnam found that ethnic diversity had the
opposite e ect. In a paper revealingly titled “E Pluribus Unum,”
Putnam examined the level of social capital in hundreds of
American communities and discovered that high levels of
immigration and ethnic diversity seem to cause a reduction in social
capital. That may not surprise you; people are racist, you might
think, and so they don’t trust people who don’t look like
themselves. But that’s not quite right. Putnam’s survey was able to
distinguish two di erent kinds of social capital: bridging capital
refers to trust between groups, between people who have di erent
values and identities, while bonding capital refers to trust within
groups. Putnam found that diversity reduced both kinds of social
capital. Here’s his conclusion:
Diversity seems to trigger not in-group/out-group
division, but anomie or social isolation. In colloquial
language, people living in ethnically diverse settings
appear to “hunker down”—that is, to pull in like a turtle.

Putnam uses Durkheim’s ideas (such as anomie) to explain why
diversity makes people turn inward and become more sel sh, less
interested in contributing to their communities. What Putnam calls
turtling is the exact opposite of what I have called hiving.
Liberals stand up for victims of oppression and exclusion. They
ght to break down arbitrary barriers (such as those based on race,
and more recently on sexual orientation). But their zeal to help
victims, combined with their low scores on the Loyalty, Authority,
and Sanctity foundations, often lead them to push for changes that
weaken groups, traditions, institutions, and moral capital. For
example, the urge to help the inner-city poor led to welfare
programs in the 1960s that reduced the value of marriage, increased
out-of-wedlock births, and weakened African American families.72
The urge to empower students by giving them the right to sue their
teachers and schools in the 1970s has eroded authority and moral
capital in schools, creating disorderly environments that harm the
poor above all.73 The urge to help Hispanic immigrants in the 1980s
led to multicultural education programs that emphasized the
di erences among Americans rather than their shared values and
identity. Emphasizing di erences makes many people more racist,
not less.74
On issue after issue, it’s as though liberals are trying to help a
subset of bees (which really does need help) even if doing so
damages the hive. Such “reforms” may lower the overall welfare of
a society, and sometimes they even hurt the very victims liberals
were trying to help.
TOWARD MORE CIVIL POLITICS
The idea of opposites as yin and yang comes from ancient China, a
culture that valued group harmony. But in the ancient Middle East,
where monotheism rst took root, the metaphor of war was more
common than the metaphor of balance. The third-century Persian
prophet Mani preached that the visible world is the battleground
between the forces of light (absolute goodness) and the forces of

darkness (absolute evil). Human beings are the frontline in the
battle; we contain both good and evil, and we each must pick one
side and ght for it.
Mani’s preaching developed into Manichaeism, a religion that
spread throughout the Middle East and in uenced Western thinking.
If you think about politics in a Manichaean way, then compromise is
a sin. God and the devil don’t issue many bipartisan proclamations,
and neither should you.
America’s political class has become far more Manichaean since
the early 1990s, rst in Washington and then in many state capitals.
The result is an increase in acrimony and gridlock, a decrease in the
ability to nd bipartisan solutions. What can be done? Many groups
and organizations have urged legislators and citizens alike to take
“civility pledges,” promising to be “more civil” and to “view
everyone in positive terms.” I don’t believe such pledges will work.
Riders can sign as many of them as they please, but the pledges are
not binding for elephants.
To escape from this mess, I believe that psychologists must work
with political scientists to identify changes that will indirectly
undermine Manichaeism. I ran a conference that tried to do this in
2007, at Princeton University. We learned that much of the increase
in polarization was unavoidable. It was the natural result of the
political realignment that took place after President Lyndon
Johnson signed the Civil Rights Act in 1964. The conservative
southern states, which had been solidly Democratic since the Civil
War (because Lincoln was a Republican) then began to leave the
Democratic Party, and by the 1990s the South was solidly
Republican. Before this realignment there had been liberals and
conservatives in both parties, which made it easy to form bipartisan
teams who could work together on legislative projects. But after the
realignment, there was no longer any overlap, either in the Senate
or in the House of Representatives. Nowadays the most liberal
Republican is typically more conservative than the most
conservative Democrat. And once the two parties became
ideologically pure—a liberal party and a conservative party—there
was bound to be a rise in Manichaeism.75

But we also learned about factors that might possibly be reversed.
The most poignant moment of the conference came when Jim
Leach, a former Republican congressman from Iowa, described the
changes that began in 1995. Newt Gingrich, the new speaker of the
House of Representatives, encouraged the large group of incoming
Republican congressmen to leave their families in their home
districts rather than moving their spouses and children to
Washington. Before 1995, congressmen from both parties attended
many of the same social events on weekends; their spouses became
friends; their children played on the same sports teams. But
nowadays most congressmen y to Washington on Monday night,
huddle with their teammates and do battle for three days, and then
y home on Thursday night. Cross-party friendships are
disappearing; Manichaeism and scorched Earth politics are
increasing.
I don’t know how Americans can convince their legislators to
move their families to Washington, and I don’t know if even that
change would revive cross-party friendships in today’s poisoned
atmosphere, but this is an example of the kind of indirect change
that might change elephants.76 Intuitions come rst, so anything we
can do to cultivate more positive social connections will alter
intuitions and, thus, downstream reasoning and behavior. Other
structural changes that might reduce Manichaeism include changing
the ways that primary elections are run, the ways that electoral
districts are drawn, and the ways that candidates raise money for
their campaigns. (See a full list of potential remedies at
www.CivilPolitics.org.)
The problem is not just limited to politicians. Technology and
changing residential patterns have allowed each of us to isolate
ourselves within cocoons of like-minded individuals. In 1976, only
27 percent of Americans lived in “landslide counties”—counties that
voted either Democratic or Republican by a margin of 20 percent or
more. But the number has risen steadily; in 2008, 48 percent of
Americans lived in a landslide county.77 Our counties and towns are
becoming increasingly segregated into “lifestyle enclaves,” in which
ways of voting, eating, working, and worshipping are increasingly

aligned. If you nd yourself in a Whole Foods store, there’s an 89
percent chance that the county surrounding you voted for Barack
Obama. If you want to nd Republicans, go to a county that
contains a Cracker Barrel restaurant (62 percent of these counties
went for McCain).78
Morality binds and blinds. This is not just something that happens
to people on the other side. We all get sucked into tribal moral
communities. We circle around sacred values and then share post
hoc arguments about why we are so right and they are so wrong.
We think the other side is blind to truth, reason, science, and
common sense, but in fact everyone goes blind when talking about
their sacred objects.
If you want to understand another group, follow the sacredness. As
a rst step, think about the six moral foundations, and try to gure
out which one or two are carrying the most weight in a particular
controversy. And if you really want to open your mind, open your
heart rst. If you can have at least one friendly interaction with a
member of the “other” group, you’ll nd it far easier to listen to
what they’re saying, and maybe even see a controversial issue in a
new light. You may not agree, but you’ll probably shift from
Manichaean disagreement to a more respectful and constructive yinyang disagreement.
IN SUM
People don’t adopt their ideologies at random, or by soaking up
whatever ideas are around them. People whose genes gave them
brains that get a special pleasure from novelty, variety, and
diversity, while simultaneously being less sensitive to signs of
threat, are predisposed (but not predestined) to become liberals.
They tend to develop certain “characteristic adaptations” and “life
narratives” that make them resonate—unconsciously and intuitively
—with the grand narratives told by political movements on the left
(such as the liberal progress narrative). People whose genes give
them brains with the opposite settings are predisposed, for the same

reasons, to resonate with the grand narratives of the right (such as
the Reagan narrative).
Once people join a political team, they get ensnared in its moral
matrix. They see con rmation of their grand narrative everywhere,
and it’s di cult—perhaps impossible—to convince them that they
are wrong if you argue with them from outside of their matrix. I
suggested that liberals might have even more di culty
understanding conservatives than the other way around, because
liberals often have di culty understanding how the Loyalty,
Authority, and Sanctity foundations have anything to do with
morality. In particular, liberals often have di culty seeing moral
capital, which I de ned as the resources that sustain a moral
community.
I suggested that liberals and conservatives are like yin and yang—
both are “necessary elements of a healthy state of political life,” as
John Stuart Mill put it. Liberals are experts in care; they are better
able to see the victims of existing social arrangements, and they
continually push us to update those arrangements and invent new
ones. As Robert F. Kennedy said: “There are those that look at
things the way they are, and ask why? I dream of things that never
were, and ask why not?” I showed how this moral matrix leads
liberals to make two points that are (in my opinion) profoundly
important for the health of a society: (1) governments can and
should restrain corporate superorganisms, and (2) some big
problems really can be solved by regulation.
I explained how libertarians (who sacralize liberty) and social
conservatives (who sacralize certain institutions and traditions)
provide a crucial counterweight to the liberal reform movements
that have been so in uential in America and Europe since the early
twentieth century. I said that libertarians are right that markets are
miraculous (at least when their externalities and other failures can
be addressed), and I said that social conservatives are right that you
don’t usually help the bees by destroying the hive.
Finally, I said that the increasing Manichaeism of American
political life is not something we can address by signing pledges and
resolving to be nicer. Our politics will become more civil when we

nd ways to change the procedures for electing politicians and the
institutions and environments within which they interact.
Morality binds and blinds. It binds us into ideological teams that
ght each other as though the fate of the world depended on our
side winning each battle. It blinds us to the fact that each team is
composed of good people who have something important to say.

