Conclusion

In this book I took you on a tour of human nature and human
history. I tried to show that my beloved topic of inquiry—moral
psychology—is the key to understanding politics, religion, and our
spectacular rise to planetary dominance. I fear that I crammed too
many sights into the tour, so let me close by highlighting the most
important ones.
In Part I, I presented the rst principle of moral psychology:
Intuitions come rst, strategic reasoning second. I explained how I
came to develop the social intuitionist model, and I used the model
to challenge the “rationalist delusion.” The heroes of this part were
David Hume (for helping us escape from rationalism and into
intuitionism) and Glaucon (for showing us the overriding
importance of reputation and other external constraints for creating
moral order).
If you bring one thing home from this part of the trip, may I
suggest that it be the image of yourself—and everyone else around
you—as being a small rider on a very large elephant. Thinking in
this way can make you more patient with other people. When you
catch yourself making up ridiculous post hoc arguments, you might
be slower to dismiss other people just because you can so easily
refute their arguments. The action in moral psychology is not really
in the pronouncements of the rider.
The second part of our tour explored the second principle of
moral psychology: There’s more to morality than harm and fairness. I
recounted my time in India, and how it helped me to step out of my
moral matrix and perceive additional moral concerns. I o ered the
metaphor that the righteous mind is like a tongue with six taste
receptors. I presented Moral Foundations Theory and the research
that my colleagues and I have conducted at YourMorals.org on the
psychology of liberals and conservatives. The heroes of this part

were Richard Shweder (for broadening our understanding of the
moral domain) and Emile Durkheim (for showing us why many
people, particularly social conservatives, value the binding
foundations of loyalty, authority, and sanctity).
If you take home one souvenir from this part of the tour, may I
suggest that it be a suspicion of moral monists. Beware of anyone
who insists that there is one true morality for all people, times, and
places—particularly if that morality is founded upon a single moral
foundation. Human societies are complex; their needs and
challenges are variable. Our minds contain a toolbox of
psychological systems, including the six moral foundations, which
can be used to meet those challenges and construct e ective moral
communities. You don’t need to use all six, and there may be certain
organizations or subcultures that can thrive with just one. But
anyone who tells you that all societies, in all eras, should be using
one particular moral matrix, resting on one particular con guration
of moral foundations, is a fundamentalist of one sort or another.
The philosopher Isaiah Berlin wrestled throughout his career with
the problem of the world’s moral diversity and what to make of it.
He rmly rejected moral relativism:
I am not a relativist; I do not say “I like my co ee with
milk and you like it without; I am in favor of kindness
and you prefer concentration camps”—each of us with
his own values, which cannot be overcome or integrated.
This I believe to be false.1
He endorsed pluralism instead, and justi ed it in this way:
I came to the conclusion that there is a plurality of
ideals, as there is a plurality of cultures and of
temperaments.… There is not an in nity of [values]: the
number of human values, of values which I can pursue
while maintaining my human semblance, my human
character, is nite—let us say 74, or perhaps 122, or 27,
but nite, whatever it may be. And the di erence this

makes is that if a man pursues one of these values, I, who
do not, am able to understand why he pursues it or what it
would be like, in his circumstances, for me to be induced
to pursue it. Hence the possibility of human
understanding.2
In the third part of our tour I presented the principle that morality
binds and blinds. We are products of multilevel selection, which
turned us into Homo duplex. We are sel sh and we are groupish. We
are 90 percent chimp and 10 percent bee. I suggested that religion
played a crucial role in our evolutionary history—our religious
minds coevolved with our religious practices to create ever-larger
moral communities, particularly after the advent of agriculture. I
described how political teams form, and why some people gravitate
to the left, others to the right. The heroes of this part were Charles
Darwin (for his theory of evolution, including multilevel selection)
and Emile Durkheim (for showing us that we are Homo duplex, with
part of our nature forged, perhaps, by group-level selection).
If you bring one thing home from this last part of the trip, may I
suggest that it be the image of a small bump on the back of our
heads—the hive switch, just under the skin, waiting to be turned on.
We’ve been told for fty years now that human beings are
fundamentally sel sh. We’re assaulted by reality TV programs
showing people at their worst. Some people actually believe that a
woman should shout “ re” if she’s being raped, on the grounds that
everyone is so sel sh that they won’t even come out to investigate
unless they fear for their own lives.3
It’s not true. We may spend most of our waking hours advancing
our own interests, but we all have the capacity to transcend selfinterest and become simply a part of a whole. It’s not just a
capacity; it’s the portal to many of life’s most cherished experiences.
This book explained why people are divided by politics and religion.
The answer is not, as Manichaeans would have it, because some
people are good and others are evil. Instead, the explanation is that

our minds were designed for groupish righteousness. We are deeply
intuitive creatures whose gut feelings drive our strategic reasoning.
This makes it di cult—but not impossible—to connect with those
who live in other matrices, which are often built on di erent
con gurations of the available moral foundations.

FIGURE 13.1

. Why Manichaeans think they are divided by politics. (photo
credit 13.1)

So the next time you nd yourself seated beside someone from
another matrix, give it a try. Don’t just jump right in. Don’t bring
up morality until you’ve found a few points of commonality or in
some other way established a bit of trust. And when you do bring
up issues of morality, try to start with some praise, or with a
sincere expression of interest.
We’re all stuck here for a while, so let’s try to work it out.

