Introduction

“Can we all get along?” That appeal was made famous on May 1,
1992, by Rodney King, a black man who had been beaten nearly to
death by four Los Angeles police o cers a year earlier. The entire
nation had seen a videotape of the beating, so when a jury failed to
convict the o cers, their acquittal triggered widespread outrage
and six days of rioting in Los Angeles. Fifty-three people were killed
and more than seven thousand buildings were torched. Much of the
mayhem was carried live; news cameras tracked the action from
helicopters circling overhead. After a particularly horri c act of
violence against a white truck driver, King was moved to make his
appeal for peace.
King’s appeal is now so overused that it has become cultural
kitsch, a catchphrase1 more often said for laughs than as a serious
plea for mutual understanding. I therefore hesitated to use King’s
words as the opening line of this book, but I decided to go ahead,
for two reasons. The rst is because most Americans nowadays are
asking King’s question not about race relations but about political
relations and the collapse of cooperation across party lines. Many
Americans feel as though the nightly news from Washington is
being sent to us from helicopters circling over the city, delivering
dispatches from the war zone.
The second reason I decided to open this book with an overused
phrase is because King followed it up with something lovely,
something rarely quoted. As he stumbled through his television
interview, ghting back tears and often repeating himself, he found
these words: “Please, we can get along here. We all can get along. I
mean, we’re all stuck here for a while. Let’s try to work it out.”
This book is about why it’s so hard for us to get along. We are
indeed all stuck here for a while, so let’s at least do what we can to

understand why we are so easily divided into hostile groups, each
one certain of its righteousness.
People who devote their lives to studying something often come to
believe that the object of their fascination is the key to
understanding everything. Books have been published in recent
years on the transformative role in human history played by
cooking, mothering, war … even salt. This is one of those books. I
study moral psychology, and I’m going to make the case that
morality is the extraordinary human capacity that made civilization
possible. I don’t mean to imply that cooking, mothering, war, and
salt were not also necessary, but in this book I’m going to take you
on a tour of human nature and history from the perspective of
moral psychology.
By the end of the tour, I hope to have given you a new way to
think about two of the most important, vexing, and divisive topics
in human life: politics and religion. Etiquette books tell us not to
discuss these topics in polite company, but I say go ahead. Politics
and religion are both expressions of our underlying moral
psychology, and an understanding of that psychology can help to
bring people together. My goal in this book is to drain some of the
heat, anger, and divisiveness out of these topics and replace them
with awe, wonder, and curiosity. We are downright lucky that we
evolved this complex moral psychology that allowed our species to
burst out of the forests and savannas and into the delights,
comforts, and extraordinary peacefulness of modern societies in just
a few thousand years.2 My hope is that this book will make
conversations about morality, politics, and religion more common,
more civil, and more fun, even in mixed company. My hope is that
it will help us to get along.
BORN TO BE RIGHTEOUS

I could have titled this book The Moral Mind to convey the sense
that the human mind is designed to “do” morality, just as it’s
designed to do language, sexuality, music, and many other things
described in popular books reporting the latest scienti c ndings.
But I chose the title The Righteous Mind to convey the sense that
human nature is not just intrinsically moral, it’s also intrinsically
moralistic, critical, and judgmental.
The word righteous comes from the old Norse word rettviss and the
old English word rihtwis, both of which mean “just, upright,
virtuous.”3 This meaning has been carried into the modern English
words righteous and righteousness, although nowadays those words
have strong religious connotations because they are usually used to
translate the Hebrew word tzedek. Tzedek is a common word in the
Hebrew Bible, often used to describe people who act in accordance
with God’s wishes, but it is also an attribute of God and of God’s
judgment of people (which is often harsh but always thought to be
just).
The linkage of righteousness and judgmentalism is captured in
some modern de nitions of righteous, such as “arising from an
outraged sense of justice, morality, or fair play.”4 The link also
appears in the term self-righteous, which means “convinced of one’s
own righteousness, especially in contrast with the actions and
beliefs of others; narrowly moralistic and intolerant.”5 I want to
show you that an obsession with righteousness (leading inevitably
to self-righteousness) is the normal human condition. It is a feature
of our evolutionary design, not a bug or error that crept into minds
that would otherwise be objective and rational.6
Our righteous minds made it possible for human beings—but no
other animals—to produce large cooperative groups, tribes, and
nations without the glue of kinship. But at the same time, our
righteous minds guarantee that our cooperative groups will always
be cursed by moralistic strife. Some degree of con ict among
groups may even be necessary for the health and development of
any society. When I was a teenager I wished for world peace, but
now I yearn for a world in which competing ideologies are kept in
balance, systems of accountability keep us all from getting away

with too much, and fewer people believe that righteous ends justify
violent means. Not a very romantic wish, but one that we might
actually achieve.
WHAT LIES AHEAD
This book has three parts, which you can think of as three separate
books—except that each one depends on the one before it. Each part
presents one major principle of moral psychology.
Part I is about the rst principle: Intuitions come rst, strategic
reasoning second.7 Moral intuitions arise automatically and almost
instantaneously, long before moral reasoning has a chance to get
started, and those rst intuitions tend to drive our later reasoning.
If you think that moral reasoning is something we do to gure out
the truth, you’ll be constantly frustrated by how foolish, biased, and
illogical people become when they disagree with you. But if you
think about moral reasoning as a skill we humans evolved to further
our social agendas—to justify our own actions and to defend the
teams we belong to—then things will make a lot more sense. Keep
your eye on the intuitions, and don’t take people’s moral arguments
at face value. They’re mostly post hoc constructions made up on the
y, crafted to advance one or more strategic objectives.
The central metaphor of these four chapters is that the mind is
divided, like a rider on an elephant, and the rider’s job is to serve the
elephant. The rider is our conscious reasoning—the stream of words
and images of which we are fully aware. The elephant is the other
99 percent of mental processes—the ones that occur outside of
awareness but that actually govern most of our behavior.8 I
developed this metaphor in my last book, The Happiness Hypothesis,
where I described how the rider and elephant work together,
sometimes poorly, as we stumble through life in search of meaning
and connection. In this book I’ll use the metaphor to solve puzzles
such as why it seems like everyone (else) is a hypocrite9 and why
political partisans are so willing to believe outrageous lies and

conspiracy theories. I’ll also use the metaphor to show you how you
can better persuade people who seem unresponsive to reason.
Part II is about the second principle of moral psychology, which is
that there’s more to morality than harm and fairness. The central
metaphor of these four chapters is that the righteous mind is like a
tongue with six taste receptors. Secular Western moralities are like
cuisines that try to activate just one or two of these receptors—
either concerns about harm and su ering, or concerns about fairness
and injustice. But people have so many other powerful moral
intuitions, such as those related to liberty, loyalty, authority, and
sanctity. I’ll explain where these six taste receptors come from, how
they form the basis of the world’s many moral cuisines, and why
politicians on the right have a built-in advantage when it comes to
cooking meals that voters like.
Part III is about the third principle: Morality binds and blinds. The
central metaphor of these four chapters is that human beings are 90
percent chimp and 10 percent bee. Human nature was produced by
natural selection working at two levels simultaneously. Individuals
compete with individuals within every group, and we are the
descendants of primates who excelled at that competition. This
gives us the ugly side of our nature, the one that is usually featured
in books about our evolutionary origins. We are indeed sel sh
hypocrites so skilled at putting on a show of virtue that we fool
even ourselves.
But human nature was also shaped as groups competed with other
groups. As Darwin said long ago, the most cohesive and cooperative
groups generally beat the groups of sel sh individualists. Darwin’s
ideas about group selection fell out of favor in the 1960s, but recent
discoveries are putting his ideas back into play, and the implications
are profound. We’re not always sel sh hypocrites. We also have the
ability, under special circumstances, to shut down our petty selves
and become like cells in a larger body, or like bees in a hive,
working for the good of the group. These experiences are often
among the most cherished of our lives, although our hivishness can
blind us to other moral concerns. Our bee-like nature facilitates
altruism, heroism, war, and genocide.

Once you see our righteous minds as primate minds with a hivish
overlay, you get a whole new perspective on morality, politics, and
religion. I’ll show that our “higher nature” allows us to be
profoundly altruistic, but that altruism is mostly aimed at members
of our own groups. I’ll show that religion is (probably) an
evolutionary adaptation for binding groups together and helping
them to create communities with a shared morality. It is not a virus
or a parasite, as some scientists (the “New Atheists”) have argued in
recent years. And I’ll use this perspective to explain why some
people are conservative, others are liberal (or progressive), and still
others become libertarians. People bind themselves into political
teams that share moral narratives. Once they accept a particular
narrative, they become blind to alternative moral worlds.
(A note on terminology: In the United States, the word liberal
refers to progressive or left-wing politics, and I will use the word in
this sense. But in Europe and elsewhere, the word liberal is truer to
its original meaning—valuing liberty above all else, including in
economic activities. When Europeans use the word liberal, they
often mean something more like the American term libertarian,
which cannot be placed easily on the left-right spectrum.10 Readers
from outside the United States may want to swap in the words
progressive or left-wing whenever I say liberal.)
In the coming chapters I’ll draw on the latest research in
neuroscience, genetics, social psychology, and evolutionary
modeling, but the take-home message of the book is ancient. It is
the realization that we are all self-righteous hypocrites:
Why do you see the speck in your neighbor’s eye, but do
not notice the log in your own eye?… You hypocrite,
rst take the log out of your own eye, and then you will
see clearly to take the speck out of your neighbor’s eye.
(MATTHEW 7:3–5)

Enlightenment (or wisdom, if you prefer) requires us all to take
the logs out of our own eyes and then escape from our ceaseless,
petty, and divisive moralism. As the eighth-century Chinese Zen
master Sen-ts’an wrote:
The Perfect Way is only di cult
for those who pick and choose;
Do not like, do not dislike;

all will then be clear.
Make a hairbreadth di erence,

and Heaven and Earth are set apart;

If you want the truth to stand clear before you,
never be for or against.

The struggle between “for” and “against”
is the mind’s worst disease.11
I’m not saying we should live our lives like Sen-ts’an. In fact, I
believe that a world without moralism, gossip, and judgment would
quickly decay into chaos. But if we want to understand ourselves,
our divisions, our limits, and our potentials, we need to step back,
drop the moralism, apply some moral psychology, and analyze the
game we’re all playing.
Let us now examine the psychology of this struggle between “for”
and “against.” It is a struggle that plays out in each of our righteous
minds, and among all of our righteous groups.

PART I

Intuitions Come First,
Strategic Reasoning Second
Central Metaphor
The mind is divided, like a rider on an elephant, and the rider’s
job is to serve the elephant.

